	

10th Annual Meeting	

Los Angeles, California
March 16-18, 2017

Social & Affective Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting 2017
March 16-18 | University of California, Los Angeles

Conference Chairs
Naomi Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles
Matthew Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles
Carolyn Parkinson, University of California, Los Angeles
Jennifer Silvers, University of California, Los Angeles
Program Committee
Molly Crockett, Yale University
Dominic Fareri, Adelphi University
Chad Forbes, University of Delaware (Committee co-chair)
Jonathan Freeman, New York University
Nicole Giuliani, University of Oregon
Johanna Jarcho, Stony Brook University
Hedy Kober, Yale University
Liz Losin, University of Miami
Dean Mobbs, CalTech
Kyle Ratner, University of California, Santa Barbara
Daniela Schiller, Mount Sinai School of Medicine (Committee co-chair)
Damian Stanley, Adelphi University
Diana Tamir, Princeton University
Dylan Wagner, The Ohio State University
SANS Executive Committee
Paul Whalen, President
Mauricio Delgado, President-Elect
Elizabeth Phelps, Past-President
Kateri McRae, Secretary
Emily Falk, Treasurer
Lauren Atlas, Member-at-Large
Mina Cikara, Member-at-Large
Jamil Zaki, Member-at-Large
Oriel FeldmanHall, Social Media Chair

Conference Schedule
Thursday, March 16
Start

End

Session

12:00 PM

2:45 PM

Registration

2:45 PM

3:00 PM

Opening Remarks

3:00 PM

4:15 PM

Symposium Session 1: Social and Affective Decision Making
Brian Knutson: From brain to internet: Neuroforecasting
social preferences
Hedy Kober: Mindfulness-based emotion regulation:
Theoretical and neural mechanisms
Alison Harris: Accounting for taste: A multi-attribute
neurocomputational model explains divergent choices for
self and others
Steve Chang: Neuronal coupling between the anterior
cingulate cortex and the amygdala reflects social decision
outcomes

4:15 PM

5:15 PM

Keynote Address
Tania Singer: Plasticity of the social brain: Effects of a
one-year mental training study on brain plasticity, social
cognition and attention, stress and prosocial behavior

5:15 PM

6:45 PM

Poster Session A & Welcome Reception

Friday, March 17
Start

End

Session

8:00 AM

9:00 AM

Coffee & Snacks

9:00 AM

10:15 AM

Symposium 2: Social Influences on Emotion
Jamil Zaki: Empathy beyond the empathizer
Dominic Fareri: Reciprocation from a friend enhances
coupling between the default mode network and ventral
striatum
Haemy Lee Masson: Neural representation of socioaffective interpersonal touch
Marie Monfils: Dominance status predicts social fear
transmission in laboratory rats

10:15 AM

	2

10:30 AM

Coffee Break

10:30 AM

11:30 AM

Keynote Debate
Ralph Adolphs: Emotions are objective and should be
distinguished from concepts and feelings
Lisa Feldman Barrett: How emotions are made: The
theory of constructed emotion

11:30 AM

11:45 AM

Coffee Break

11:45 AM

12:45 PM

Faculty Blitz
Damian Stanley: Using model-based approaches to
reveal specific theory-of-mind impairment in autism
Maital Neta: Through the eyes of the beholder:
Perceptual input from a gaze contingent window
modulates valence bias in response to emotional
ambiguity
Ajay Satpute: Contextual connectivity: A framework for
understanding the intrinsic dynamic architecture of
functional networks
Diana Tamir: Simulating other people changes the self
Luke Chang: Mapping computation to brain with intersubject representational similarity analysis
Darby Saxbe: The fathering brain and body
Eliza Bliss-Moreau: Anterior cingulate cortex damage
impedes decision-making and eliminates social preference

12:45 PM

2:00 PM

Buffet lunch provided on the Centennial Terrace Deck

2:00 PM

3:30 PM

Symposium Session 3: Understanding Other Minds
Alex Todorov: Mapping the social space of the face
Jon Freeman: Neural mechanisms of stereotypic vision
Greg Berns: Functional MRI in awake unrestrained dogs
Rebecca Saxe: Early origins of the social brain

3:30 PM

5:00 PM

Poster Session B & Presidential Reception

5:00 PM

6:30 PM

Presidential Symposium
Todd Heatherton: A Google model of MPFC
Alex Martin: Can aberrant patterns of functional
connectivity be modified? And, if so, would it matter?

Saturday, March 18
Start

End

Session

8:00 AM

9:00 AM

Coffee & Snacks

	

3

9:00 AM

10:15 AM

Symposium Session 4: Social and Reward Learning
Andreas Olsson: New approaches to the social
transmission and learning of affective information
Oriel FeldmanHall: Stimulus generalization as a
mechanism for learning who to trust
Yina Ma: Neurocomputation of social values: Distinct
oxytocin effects in individualists and prosocials
Adriana Galván: Better learning in adolescents than
adults: The role of the developing brain

10:15 AM

11:45 AM

Poster Session C & Coffee Break

11:45 AM

12:45 PM

Distinguished Scholar Address
BJ Casey: Self control: When social and affective
processes overshadow cognitive processes

12:45 PM

2:00 PM

Buffet lunch provided on the Centennial Terrace Deck
1:15 – 1:45 PM: Optional Adolescent Brain Cognitive
Development (ABCD) Study Q & A Session led by BJ Casey
in Centennial Ballroom A/B

2:00 PM

3:00 PM

Trainee Blitz
Eshin Jolly: Spontaneous mentalizing about parasocial
relationships
Ian Roberts: Acetaminophen reduces the effects of social
expectations on economic decision-making via dampened
affect
Meghan Meyer: Evidence that default network
connectivity during rest consolidates social information
Song Qi: How survival circuits optimize escape decisions
in humans
Julian Wills: Shifting prosocial intuitions: Neural evidence
for a person x situation account of group-based
cooperation
Jie Hu: vmPFC mediates the effect of trait empathy on
other-regarding tendencies in altruistic behavior
Regina Lapate: Lateral prefrontal function causally
determines the pervasiveness of affect

3:00 PM

3:15 PM

Coffee Break

3:15 PM

4:30 PM

Symposium Session 5: Novel Approaches to Studying Social
and Affective Processes
Bill Kelley: Combining fMRI and mobile sensing
technology to study the social brain

	4

Asieh Zadbood: How do we share our memories with
other brains?
Richard Betzel: Positive affect, surprise, and fatigue are
correlates of network flexibility
Hakwan Lau: Unconscious fear reduction via decoded
fMRI neurofeedback
4:30 PM

5:00 PM

Presidential Closing Remarks
Paul Whalen, SANS President

	

5

Luskin Conference Center | Level 1

	6

Luskin Conference Center | Level 3

	

7

2017 Awards
Distinguished Scholar Award
BJ Casey, Yale University
Innovation Awards
Lockwood, P. L., Apps, M. A., Valton, V., Viding, E., & Roiser, J. P. (2016).
Neurocomputational mechanisms of prosocial learning and links to
empathy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(35), 9763-9768.
Stolier, R. M., & Freeman, J. B. (2016). Neural pattern similarity reveals the inherent
intersection of social categories. Nature Neuroscience, 19(6), 795-797.
SANS Poster Awards1
Kristin M. Brethel-Haurwitz
Casey L. Brown
Robert Chavez
Jin Hyun Cheong
Alex W. daSilva
Bruce P. Dore
Selene Gallo
Joao F. Guassi Moreira
Martin A. Imhof
Pyungwon Kang
Yuan Chang Leong
Hause Lin
Philip Parnamets
Michael H. Parrish
Maya L. Rosen
Christin Scholz
Roberta A. Schriber
Benjamin S. Stillerman
Ryan M. Stolier
Alicia Vallorani
SANS 2016 Logo – Designed by Lianne Barnes, University of California, Los Angeles
Icon made by Freepik from Flaticon

																																																								
1

In recognition of the top 20 most highly rated abstracts that will be presented as posters.

	8

Thursday, March 16 2017
Opening Remarks
Thursday, March 16 2017
2:45 – 3:00 PM

Symposium

Social and Affective Decision Making
Thursday, March 16 2017
3:00 – 4:15 PM
Chaired by: Gregory Samanez-Larkin, Yale University
Brian Knutson, Stanford University
Hedy Kober, Yale University
Alison Harris, Claremont McKenna College
Steve Chang, Yale University

ABSTRACTS
FROM BRAIN TO INTERNET: NEUROFORECASTING SOCIAL PREFERENCES
Brian Knutson – Stanford University
Researchers now use neuroimaging data to predict individual financial choices -- but do
they also predict choices that benefit others, and further forecast those choices at market
scale? Recent findings on microlending and crowdfunding suggest that some neural
predictors of individual prosocial choice may also forecast those choices on the internet.
MINDFULNESS-BASED EMOTION REGULATION: THEORETICAL AND NEURAL
MECHANISMS
Hedy Kober – Yale University
Mindfulness is typically defined as (1) attention to present-moment experience, coupled
with (2) a non-judgmental, accepting attitude. In two studies we investigated how
mindfulness works to regulate emotion. In study 1, we trained cigarette-smoking
participants to use mindfulness-acceptance to regulate their cigarette craving. We
exposed them to smoking-related images, known to increase cigarette craving. On
alternating trials, we asked participants to either respond naturally, or practice mindfulacceptance of craving. We found that mindful-acceptance reduced self-reported craving,
and neural activity in regions previously associated with the experience of craving.
However, we did not find concomitant increases in prefrontal activity, unlike prior work
with reappraisal-based emotion regulation. In study 2, we trained healthy adults in
mindful-acceptance of negative emotion and physical pain. We exposed them to negative
and neutral images and to painful and neutral temperatures. On alternating blocks, we
asked them to either react naturally or exercise mindful-acceptance. We found that
mindful-acceptance reduced self-reported negative affect for negative images and painful
temperatures. Further, mindful-acceptance reduced amygdala responses to negative

	

9

images, and reduced pain-evoked responses in medial and lateral pain systems.
Classification analysis showed that mindful-acceptance significantly reduced activity the
“neurological pain signature” - a multivariate, a priori pattern previously established as a
biomarker for experimental pain. However, mindfulness-based regulation did not depend
on prefrontal recruitment. Taken together, findings suggest that mindful-acceptance
reduces reactivity to emotional stimuli via different mechanisms than cognitive
reappraisal. Importantly, its effects appear to extend beyond judgment, decision-making,
and self-report to influence affective brain processes in neurobiologically-meaningful
ways.
ACCOUNTING FOR TASTE: A MULTI-ATTRIBUTE NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL
MODEL EXPLAINS DIVERGENT CHOICES FOR SELF AND OTHERS
Alison Harris – Claremont McKenna College; John Clithero – Pomona College; Cendri
Hutcherson – University of Toronto
Although research suggests that we construct choices for ourselves through the weighted
integration of different choice-relevant attribute values, dual-process models posit that
separate mechanisms are recruited when choosing on behalf of others. Here we examine
this issue by simultaneously fitting a multi-attribute extension of the drift diffusion model
(DDM) to choices, response times (RT), and event-related potentials (ERP) from a social
decision-making task. Hungry participants with unrestricted diets selected foods for
themselves, a similarly unrestricted eater, and a dissimilar, self-identified healthy eater.
We demonstrate that a single computational process not only accounts for the choices
we make for ourselves and others, but also when and why those choices diverge.
Bayesian hierarchical modeling revealed different weighting of taste and health attributes
depending on the recipient, with increased sensitivity to health information when
choosing for the healthy eater. These varying attribute weights were reflected in both
behavioral and neural parameters, and explained a prominent pattern in the choice and
RT data frequently attributed to dual processes: participants took longer to decide when
making different choices for themselves versus others. Furthermore, neural value signals
emerge within the same time window for self and others, reflect health and taste
preferences of the recipient, and are linked to evidence accumulation in the DDM. Our
results provide a parsimonious explanation for divergent choice and RT patterns in social
decision-making based not on a dual process account, but rather on a single
neurocomputational mechanism.
NEURONAL COUPLING BETWEEN THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX AND
THE AMYGDALA REFLECTS SOCIAL DECISION OUTCOMES
Steve Chang – Yale University
One critical component of social processing is the computation of prosocial and antisocial
decisions, and recent studies have begun to elucidate how neurons from individual brain
regions such as the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACCg) and the basolateral amygdala (BLA)
are engaged in social decision-making. Although strong reciprocal connections between
BLA and ACCg suggest their functional interactions, the mechanisms by which BLA and
ACCg are coordinated remain elusive. In a social reward allocation task in which an actor
monkey chooses among delivering juice rewards to himself (Self), another monkey
(Other), both himself and the other (Both), or a juice collection bottle (Neither), we
recorded local field potential (LFP) activity from ACCg and BLA simultaneously to
investigate their neuronal coordination. The actors preferred to deliver rewards to Other
over Neither, but preferred to deliver rewards to Self over Both, providing the behavioral
contexts for examining the neuronal interaction with respect to prosocial and antisocial
decisions. We found enhanced coupling in the beta and gamma frequency bands
between ACCg and BLA for prosocial reward outcomes (contrasting Other versus Neither)
compared to antisocial reward outcomes (contrasting Self versus Both). Over multiple
days of testing, the preference to donate reward to Other compared to Neither

	10

(prosocial) and the degree of ACCg-BLA synchrony were correlated, whereas such a
correlation was absent for preference to deliver juice to Self compared to Both
(antisocial). Our results demonstrate that neuronal synchronization between ACCg and
BLA carries unique signatures underlying the computations of prosocial and antisocial
decisions.

Keynote

Keynote Address
Thursday, March 16 2017
4:15 – 5:15 PM
Introduced by: Jamil Zaki, Stanford University
Tania Singer
Director of the Department of Social Neuroscience
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences

ABSTRACT
PLASTICITY OF THE SOCIAL BRAIN: EFFECTS OF A ONE-YEAR MENTAL
TRAINING STUDY ON BRAIN PLASTICITY, SOCIAL COGNITION AND
ATTENTION, STRESS AND PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR
Tania Singer – Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences
In the last decades, plasticity research has suggested that training of mental capacities
such as attention, mindfulness, and compassion is effective and leads to changes in brain
functions associated with increases in positive affect, pro-social behavior, and better
health. I will introduce the ReSource Project, a large-scale multi-methodological one-year
secular mental training program. Participants were trained in three separate modules
allowing us to distinguish effects based on training of a) attention and interoceptive body
awareness (Presence), b) care, compassion, and emotion-regulation (Affect), and c)
Theory of Mind and meta-cognitive awareness (Perspective). We assessed data from
more than 300 training and control subjects, with over 90 measures including subjective
measures, questionnaires, event-sampling data, a variety of behavioral, brain,
physiological and biological data. I will present first evidence of training-module specific
changes in markers of both, functional and structural brain plasticity, stress reduction,
subjective well-being, and different psychological as well as economic measures
assessing social cognitive capacities such as empathy, compassion, and Theory of Mind
as well as prosocial behavior and cooperation. These findings will be discussed in relation
to their meaning for models of social cognition, plasticity research and contemplative
studies in general, and their importance to initiate societal change.

Posters

Poster Session A & Welcome Reception
Thursday, March 16 2017
5:15 – 6:45 PM
See page 31 for abstracts.

	

11

Friday, March 17 2017
Coffee & Snacks
Friday, March 17 2017
8:00 – 9:00 AM

Symposium

Social Influences on Emotion
Friday, March 17 2017
9:00 – 10:15 AM
Chaired by: Naomi Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles
Jamil Zaki, Stanford University
Dominic Fareri, Adelphi University
Haemy Lee Masson, University of Leuven
Marie Monfils, University of Texas, Austin

ABSTRACTS
EMPATHY BEYOND THE EMPATHIZER
Jamil Zaki – Stanford University
Decades of neuroimaging research demonstrate that empathizers who consider the
emotions of social “targets” engage a consistent system of brain regions, including
midline and lateral temporal cortex. These regions appear to be involved in empathic
inference, but virtually all studies of this phenomenon focus on the brains of empathizers
alone. In the work I’ll describe here, my lab widens the study of empathy to instead
explore brain processes beyond the empathizer. In one study, we used simultaneous
EMG and fMRI to isolate brain processes that targets bring online when expressing
themselves to empathizers. When they believed they were visible to empathizers, targets
expressed themselves more clearly, engaged brain structures associated with empathic
inference, and exhibited coupling between facial expressions and activity in these
structures. This suggests that instead of spontaneously “leaking out” their internal states,
targets manage their expressions to produce a particular impression in empathizers. In a
second study, we focused on people who encounter empathic community members. We
characterized dorm networks at Stanford and scanned individuals with fMRI while they
viewed images of empathic, versus less empathic, dorm-mates. A stable pattern of brain
activity including MPFC, posterior cingulate, and temporal pole robustly predicted the
empathy of dorm members viewed by individuals in the scanner. This occurred even in
the absence of an active task, suggesting that people chronically monitor social others’
social value. Together, this work demonstrates the utility of looking past empathizers
alone and considering the brain processes of people engaged in multiple roles within an
empathic exchange.

	12

RECIPROCATION FROM A FRIEND ENHANCES COUPLING BETWEEN THE
DEFAULT MODE NETWORK AND VENTRAL STRIATUM
Dominic S. Fareri – Adelphi University; David V. Smith – Temple University; Mauricio R.
Delgado – Rutgers University
Close social relationships are inherently rewarding, satisfying basic social needs of
belongingness and promoting emotional and mental well-being. We have recently
demonstrated that close relationships can also enhance the value of positive experiences:
rewards shared with a close friend elicit stronger reward value signals in the ventral
striatum (VS) than those shared with a stranger. Moreover, decisions to pursue shared
rewards with a friend rely on a neurocomputational signal of social value in the VS and
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), contingent upon subjective perceptions of relationship
strength. An intriguing question pertains to whether such representations of social value
evoke interactions between socially oriented neural networks and value-related regions.
The default mode network (DMN) is of particular interest because nodes within this
network (e.g., mPFC, precuneus, posterior cingulate) routinely process social
information. To examine how these nodes collectively contribute to social reward
processing, we employed a novel network-based psychophysiological interaction analysis
(nPPI) on a task where participants (N = 26) played an iterated trust game with a close
friend, a stranger, and a computer. We conducted a spatial regression to extract the
timeseries from the DMN and other canonical functional networks. Our nPPI analysis
using the DMN as a seed revealed DMN coupling with VS only when participants
experienced reciprocation from a close friend. Interestingly, DMN coupling emerged with
a region of mid/posterior cingulate, but not VS, when a stranger reciprocated. These
findings suggest that close relationships uniquely influence interactions between socially
oriented networks and value-related regions during social reward processing.
NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF SOCIO-AFFECTIVE INTERPERSONAL TOUCH
Haemy Lee Masson – University of Leuven; Hans Op de Beeck – University of Leuven
Interpersonal touch conveys a vast amount of socio-affective information between
interacting people. Understanding interpersonal touch behavior from visual observation is
crucial for social competence and empathy processing both of which are driven by theory
of mind (ToM) mechanisms. Previous studies suggest that such vicarious touch
information is processed in several brain areas, including also somatosensory cortices.
These studies, however, used only a limited range of stimuli, leaving the question open
which brain areas may be involved in touch observation. In the present study, we
therefore first created a larger database of interpersonal touch actions (39 videos, 3s
duration). Next, participants (N=15) judged the valence and arousal of all videos from
which we extracted group affective similarity matrices. Subsequently, the same
participants viewed the stimuli in the scanner while performing an orthogonal task. Using
correlational multivariate pattern analysis, we extracted group neural similarity matrices
in early somatosensory cortex (BA2) and temporoparietal junction (TPJ) as regions of
interest. Lastly, multiple regression analysis was implemented to predict the neural
similarity matrix using valence and arousal judgments, as well as the motion energy of
each video. Statistical permutation tests showed that both early somatosensory area and
TPJ represent valence information even after controlling for the effects of arousal and
motion energy. Our results for the first time chart how both socio-cognitive brain areas
as well as early somatosensory cortex represent high-level information about observed
touch – a finding that may be explained by touch imagery during observation in the
absence of actual touch.
DOMINANCE STATUS PREDICTS SOCIAL FEAR TRANSMISSION IN
LABORATORY RATS
Marie Monfils – University of Texas, Austin
Acquiring information about stimuli that predict danger, through either direct experience

	

13

or inference from a social context, is crucial for individuals' ability to generate appropriate
behaviors in response to threats. Utilizing a modified demonstrator-observer paradigm
(fear conditioning by proxy) that allows for free interaction between subjects, we show
that social dominance hierarchy, and the interactive social behaviors of caged rats, is
predictive of social fear transmission, with subordinate rats displaying increased fear
responses after interacting with a fear-conditioned dominant rat during fear retrieval.
Fear conditioning by proxy conserves some of the pathways necessary for direct fear
learning (e.g., lateral amygdala) but is unique in that it requires regions necessary for
emotional regulation (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex), making this paradigm an important
tool for evaluating learning and behavior in the laboratory setting.

Coffee Break
Friday, March 17 2017
10:15 – 10:30 AM

Debate

Keynote Debate
Friday, March 17 2017
10:30 – 11:30 AM
Moderated by: Matt Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles
Ralph Adolphs, Caltech
Lisa Feldman Barrett, Northeastern University

ABSTRACTS
EMOTIONS ARE OBJECTIVE AND SHOULD BE DISTINGUISHED FROM
CONCEPTS AND FEELINGS
Ralph Adolphs – Caltech
A main challenge for affective neuroscience is that it doesn’t make enough distinctions
when it studies emotions, and that it often takes as foundational phenomena that are
identified subjectively. I view emotion states as evolved functional states that regulate
complex behavior, in both people and animals, in response to challenges that instantiate
recurrent environmental themes. Affective neuroscience studies emotions in this sense,
but it also studies the conscious experience of emotion (“feelings”), our ability to
attribute emotions to others and to animals (“attribution”, “anthropomorphizing”), our
ability to think and talk about emotion (“concepts of emotion”, “semantic knowledge of
emotion”), and the behaviors caused by an emotion (“expression of emotions”,
“emotional reactions”). While they are of course related, these are all different things. I
think that the most pressing challenge facing affective neuroscience is the need to
carefully distinguish between these distinct aspects of “emotion”. Limitations of this view
are that it may omit many phenomena often studied as “emotional”; but it will help
clarify what a neuroscience of emotion is really about, as distinct from consciousness
studies or social neuroscience.

	14

HOW EMOTIONS ARE MADE: THE THEORY OF CONSTRUCTED EMOTION
Lisa Feldman Barrett – Northeastern University
The science of emotion has been structured according to the mental categories
bequeathed by ancient mental philosophy. Scientists have spent the last century
searching for the elusive brain basis of these categories, on the assumption that the
emotion categories we experience and perceive as distinct must also be distinct in
nature. If the history of science has taught us anything, however, it is that human
experiences are a poor guide to the way that the natural world works. The last two
decades of neuroscience research have brought us to the brink of a paradigm shift in
understanding the workings of the nervous system, setting the stage to revolutionize our
scientific understanding of emotions (or any mental category). In this debate, I will begin
with several of these new insights about the structure and function of the human brain,
and then ask what sorts of emotions a human brain can make. The answer, I will
suggest, is a computational theory of emotion called the theory of constructed emotion. I
will introduce the theory's basic hypotheses, contrast them briefly with the classical view
of emotion, and consider selected findings on the brain basis of emotion through the
theory’s lens. I will also explain why functionalism cannot save the classical view of
emotion.

Coffee Break
Friday, March 17 2017
11:30 – 11:45 AM

Blitz Talks

Faculty Data Blitz
Friday, March 17 2017
11:45 AM – 12:45 PM
Chaired by: Anne Krendl, Indiana University
Damian Stanley, Adelphi University
Maital Neta, University of Nebraska – Lincoln
Ajay Satpute , Pomona College
Diana Tamir, Princeton University
Luke Chang, Dartmouth College
Darby Saxbe, University of Southern California
Eliza Bliss-Moreau, University of California, Davis

ABSTRACTS
USING MODEL-BASED APPROACHES TO REVEAL SPECIFIC THEORY-OF-MIND
IMPAIRMENT IN AUTISM
Damian Stanley – Adelphi University
Successful navigation of our social environment requires the probabilistic representation

	

15

of social targets (i.e. individuals and groups) as well as the ability to incorporate novel
information, integrate multiple representations, and utilize this information to act. While
Social Neuroscience has shed light on many of these processes, we still lack a coherent,
information-processing-based account of the specific neural computations that give rise
to social cognition. To develop this account requires theoretically-informed, and
experimentally-testable, models of how we perceive, learn, and make decisions about
others. In support of this goal, we used a model-based theory-of-mind (mbToM) task to
characterize the probabilistic representation of theory-of-mind (ToM) and its impairment
in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Participants (26 high-functioning adults with ASD and
53 matched healthy controls) observed a social target’s behavior as they chose whether
to donate money to three different charities or keep it for themselves. The social targets
had probabilistic beliefs about whether the computer was reversing their decisions or not
and idiosyncratic preferences across the three charities. Thus, the mbToM task required
participants to integrate probabilistic representations of the social target’s beliefs with
their decision behavior in order to learn their underlying preferences. Both ASD and
Control participants were able to reason correctly about the task and track the social
target’s beliefs, however individuals with ASD were specifically impaired at learning the
social target’s preferences. These results demonstrate the utility of model-based
approaches to Social Neuroscience for delineating the specific computations required for
successful social behavior.
THROUGH THE EYES OF THE BEHOLDER: PERCEPTUAL INPUT FROM A GAZE
CONTINGENT WINDOW MODULATES VALENCE BIAS IN RESPONSE TO
EMOTIONAL AMBIGUITY
Maital Neta – University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Although some facial expressions provide clear information about the emotions and
intentions of others (happy, angry), others (surprise) are ambiguous because they have
signaled both positive (e.g., a surprise party) and negative outcomes (e.g., witnessing an
accident). Without a clarifying context, surprised expressions are interpreted as positive
by some people and negative by others, and this valence bias is stable across time.
When compared to fearful expressions, which are consistently rated as negative, surprise
and fear share similar morphological features (e.g. widened eyes) primarily in the upper
part of the face (eyes). Recently, we demonstrated that the valence bias was associated
with a specific pattern of eye movements when viewing these faces (positive bias was
associated with faster fixation to the lower part of the face). In this follow-up study, we
identified the participant with the most positive and most negative valence bias in our
previous work. The eye movements on each image from these two individuals were
used to create two gaze contingent windows such that new participants would see the
same faces, but through the eyes of these two people (subjects saw only the areas of
the face that were directly fixated by the original participants in the exact order they
were fixated). We found that the input provided by the gaze contingent windows
modulated the valence ratings of surprise, but not fear faces. These findings suggest
there are meaningful individual differences in how people process faces, and that these
differences impact our emotional experience.
CONTEXTUAL CONNECTIVITY: A FRAMEWORK FOR UNDERSTANDING THE
INTRINSIC DYNAMIC ARCHITECTURE OF FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS
Ajay B. Satpute – Pomona College; Rastko Ciric – Pomona College
Investigations of the human brain’s connectomic architecture have produced two
alternative models. One describes the brain’s spatial structure in terms of localized,
canonical networks, such as the “default mode” network. The other describes the brain’s
temporal structure in terms of whole-brain connectivity states. Using tools from
connectivity dynamics, we deconstructed the elementary units of both models- the
spatial network and the temporal state- into a common factor, or spatially localized

	16

connectivity state in order to examine the fit of each model. Inconsistent with the
canonical model of localized and temporally stable networks, we found that brain
networks are temporally decomposable into an array of connectivity states. Moreover,
each local connectivity state also provides information about the global state of the entire
brain. However, inconsistent with whole-brain models that disregard network boundaries,
our results also indicate that networks retain a degree of modularization. To
accommodate these findings, we advance an alternative model, “contextual
connectivity”, in which networks are composed from a set of dynamically recurring
states, each of which is associated with a specific whole-brain context. Applications of
our model are discussed for the default mode network and the salience network.
SIMULATING OTHER PEOPLE CHANGES THE SELF
Diana Tamir – Princeton University
The self is not static. Instead, our identities change considerably over development and
across situations. Here we propose one mechanism for self-change: simulating others.
This suggestion builds from two previous lines of research. First, social cognition research
finds that people retrieve knowledge about themselves—their past experiences, beliefs,
and reactions—when simulating other people’s experience. Second, memory research
finds that when information is retrieved, it enters a labile state and can be altered by
concurrently presented information. Thus, when simulating another person, retrieved
self-knowledge may enter a labile state and blend together with information about the
other person. This should alter self-knowledge to become more similar to the target of
simulation. We test this hypothesis in four studies. In each study, participants (i) recalled
episodic memories (Studies 1 & 4) or reported personal traits (Studies 2 & 3), (ii)
simulated the same episodes/traits for other people, and (iii) re-recalled personal
episodes/traits. This allowed us to measure changes in similarity between self and the
simulated other from pre- to post-simulation. Results consistently demonstrated that
simulation changed self-knowledge. People’s episodic memories and trait knowledge both
became more similar to the target post-simulation. This change persisted even after a
24-hour delay. Finally, recruiting more self-knowledge during simulation corresponded
with greater increases in similarity between the self and simulated other. These results
suggest that simulation changes the self to be more similar to the other, and that this
effect is dependent on retrieval of self-knowledge during simulation.
MAPPING COMPUTATION TO BRAIN WITH INTER-SUBJECT
REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY ANALYSIS
Luke Chang – Dartmouth College; Eshin Jolly – Dartmouth College; Jin Hyun Cheong –
Dartmouth College
A major goal of social and affective neuroscience is to identify systematic mappings
between psychological and neural function. The standard paradigm is to manipulate a
social/affective state and identify regions of the brain that change consistently across
people. However, this approach cannot scale to more naturalistic experimental paradigms
and assumes that systematic differences across people are noise. Here we identify the
social and affective processes associated with representing complex character
relationships while participants watch a TV drama (Friday Night Lights) using InterSubject Representational Similarity Analysis. Combining ideas from Inter-Subject
Connectivity and Representational Similarity Analysis, this technique leverages individual
variability to link covariance in brain responses to covariance in psychological processes
across people. In other words, participants who share similar perceptions about character
relationships should have similar brain responses in regions involved in making the
judgments. Indeed, this method finds that temporal patterns of activity in the TPJ, STS,
and PCC across participants exhibit a similar structure to participants’ perceptions of
character relationships. In addition, this technique is also sensitive to affective
experiences. Participants who liked the same characters had a similar response profile in

	

17

the ventral striatum while watching the show. Together these results demonstrate that
variation in responses across participants do not simply reflect noise, but rather can
provide a powerful technique to extract meaningful signals associated with psychological
processes. We hope that this technique will help social and affective neuroscience
researchers explore new experimental avenues using naturalistic paradigms.
THE FATHERING BRAIN AND BODY
Darby Saxbe – University of Southern California
Caring for young children is emotionally and cognitively demanding. For example, when
an infant cries, an effective parent orients to the distress, interprets its source, modulates
his/her own emotional response to the cry, and makes decisions about how to soothe the
child. Parents must also find caregiving sufficiently rewarding to motivate the frequent,
sustained interactions that childrearing requires. Therefore, the “parenting brain” should
recruit a wide variety of systems that support salience detection, empathy and
perspective-taking, executive functioning and decision-making, distress tolerance, and
motivation/reward processes. The hormonal milieu of the “parenting body” should
reinforce nurturant, affiliative behavior and dampen sexual motivation, competition, and
aggression. Given the evolutionary importance of infant care, the brain and body should
show multiple mechanisms for adapting to parenthood. The transition to parenthood may
represent a critical window for neuroplasticity in both parents. In women, pregnancy,
birth, and breastfeeding have profound neuroendocrine effects. Absent these direct
experiences, fathers’ neurobiological changes may entrain with mothers or be shaped by
the experience of caring for a new baby. Despite the importance of fathers and variability
in fathering, surprisingly little is known about the factors that predict fathers’ successful
transition to and sustained investment in parenting. This blitz talk will present pilot data
on men’s hormonal changes over the transition to parenthood, and describe a newlylaunched neuroimaging protocol to examine structural and functional changes in the
brains of new fathers.
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX DAMAGE IMPEDES DECISION-MAKING AND
ELIMINATES SOCIAL PREFERENCE
Eliza Bliss-Moreau – University of California, Davis
The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) has been broadly implicated in cognitive, social, and
emotional processing, although the extent to which normal ACC function is required for
these processes is not clear. To address that question, we evaluated both decisionmaking and preference for social information in male rhesus macaques that received
neurotoxic lesions to the ACC (N=6) or sham operations (N=7). Monkeys completed a
task in which they selected “social” or “nonsocial” videos by visually fixating on one of
two “choice” stimuli —a blue square or a yellow square. Fixating on the blue square
activated a social video and fixating on the yellow square activated a nonsocial video (or
the reverse, counterbalanced across monkeys). Monkeys completed 40 trials or 2 hrs of
testing per day for 5 days. Significant group differences were observed both in terms of
choice and preference for social information. Control animals completed significantly
more trials than the ACC-lesioned animals, because lesioned animals often became
“stuck” during the choice phase. Control animals were more efficient at choosing, as
evidenced by significantly fewer fixations on the choice stimuli. They also selected more
social videos than did ACC-lesioned animals and demonstrated a preference for social
versus nonsocial information. In contrast, ACC-lesioned animals did not select social or
nonsocial videos more frequently than chance, indicating no preference for one type of
information. Implications for the ACC’s role in cognitive control and social processing will
be discussed.

	18

Lunch
Friday, March 17 2017
12:45 – 2:00 PM
Buffet lunch provided on the Centennial Terrace Deck.

Symposium

Understanding Other Minds
Friday, March 17 2017
2:00 – 3:30 PM
Chaired by: Jasmin Cloutier, University of Chicago
Alex Todorov, Princeton University
Jon Freeman, New York University
Gregory Berns, Emory University
Rebecca Saxe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

ABSTRACTS
MAPPING THE SOCIAL SPACE OF THE FACE
Alex Todorov – Princeton University
People form instantaneous impressions from faces and agree in these impressions. These
impressions are also consequential, predicting important outcomes ranging from
sentencing decisions to political elections. But what determines these impressions? In the
first systematic study of first impressions in psychology, Secord and his colleagues noted
that “the conventional ‘elementalizing’ used by psychologists in seeking to explain their
data is simply inappropriate.” In the last 10 years, we have introduced data-driven
computational methods that allow us to visualize the configurations of face features
leading to specific impressions such as trustworthiness. Building on these methods and
using novel techniques to mask faces, we can visualize not only the face configurations
important for specific impressions but also those that spontaneously emerge in
consciousness. Moreover, we can use these methods to visualize neural responses.
Currently, we are applying the methods to intracranially recorded EEG in patients
undergoing treatment for epilepsy. Recording from the amygdala and temporal cortex,
we show that different face configurations are distributed over multiple loci and temporal
windows. We are also exploring the applications of these methods to fMRI data. Although
the application of the methods to neural data is challenging because of the multidimensional nature of the data, the methods have a considerable promise of elucidating
the principles of neural coding of faces.
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF STEREOTYPIC VISION
Jon Freeman – New York University; Ryan Stolier – New York University
Visual perceptions of social categories are often thought to reflect direct ‘read outs’ of
facial features. Recent computational models suggest, instead, that they emerge from a

	

19

dynamic negotiation between the processing of facial features and top-down factors
(e.g., stereotypes) harbored within perceivers. In such models, faces activate social
categories, which in turn spontaneously activate stereotypes. Once triggered, stereotypes
can create biases in how a face is perceived, leading its visual representation to become
more consistent with stereotypes. We tested key predictions of such models across four
fMRI studies. Study 1 used MVPA to provide evidence that faces simultaneously activate
multiple social categories that manifest in patterns of the right fusiform gyrus (FG). In
Study 2, neural patterns elicited by viewing faces, category-labels, and stereotype-traits
demonstrated that faces automatically elicit stereotype activation that is represented in
the left anterior temporal lobe (ATL). In Study 3, we show that overlapping stereotypes
(male and Black categories sharing stereotypes: ‘aggressive’) bias the visual perception
of social categories and lead those categories to exhibit greater neural-pattern similarity
in the FG and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC). Study 4 replicated this effect but controlled for
visual confounds and linked it to inter-individual variability in stereotypical associations.
Together, the results suggest that social categories automatically activate stereotypes
that in turn shape their own perception. The findings point to a network underlying
stereotypic vision, in which faces activate stereotypical associations in the ATL, which are
used by the OFC to form visual predictions that in turn modulate FG face representation.
FUNCTIONAL MRI IN AWAKE UNRESTRAINED DOGS
Gregory Berns – Emory University; Peter Cook – New College of Florida; Ashley Prichard
– Emory University; Andrew Brooks – Emory University; Mark Spivak – Dog Star
Technologies
The domestic dog’s accessibility, social intelligence, and evolutionary history with humans
has led to increasing interest in canine cognition. Despite a growing body of data about
canine behavior and cognitive skills, relatively few advances have been made in
understanding canine brain function. Practical and ethical concerns had limited the use of
the invasive brain imaging techniques typically used with primate and rodent models.
However, the demonstration that dogs can be trained to cooperatively participate in fMRI
studies has opened up a wealth of new data about canine brain function. Canine fMRI
experiments can be divided into passive and active tasks. Passive tasks focus on mapping
different perceptual systems of the canine brain and include responses to simple and
complex visual stimuli (e.g. colored shapes vs. faces), auditory stimuli (sounds, voices),
and olfactory stimuli (simple volatiles, biological odors). Passive tasks do not require the
dog to do anything except remain motionless. In contrast, active tasks involve the
elicitation of a response or a trained behavior. Active tasks present unique challenges
because of the potential confound of subject movement. However, when the dog is
trained to move only on cue, the movement artifacts can be delayed in time from the
salient neural events. Examples of this approach include response inhibition and delayed
match paradigms for memory. Many of these neural measures are found to correlate
with out-of-scanner metrics of personality and behavior, and may eventually be used to
predict a dog’s suitability for specific working roles.
EARLY ORIGINS OF THE SOCIAL BRAIN
Rebecca Saxe – Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Humans are the ultra-social animal, and we have a correspondingly ultra-social brain.
Large swaths of human “association cortex” turn out to be preferentially active when
perceiving, conceiving, or interacting with other people. How does this functional
organization develop? We collected fMRI data while young children, and infants, watched
movies involving other people. Both experiments suggest that the large scale
organization of the social brain is present as early as we can look for it; over time, these
regions become increasingly selective for specific aspects of other people.

	20

Posters

Poster Session B & Presidential Reception
Friday, March 17 2017
3:30 – 5:00 PM
See page 57 for abstracts.

Symposium

Presidential Symposium
Friday, March 17 2017
5:00 – 6:30 PM
Introduced by: Paul Whalen, Dartmouth College
Todd Heatherton, Dartmouth College
Alex Martin, National Institute of Mental Health

ABSTRACTS
A GOOGLE MODEL OF MPFC
Todd Heatherton – Dartmouth College
A key question in psychology and neuroscience is how activity in the brain gives rise to
the unitary and coherent sense of self that exists across time and place. Neuroimaging
research has emphasized the importance of a region in the medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) when people perform tasks that are relevant to the self. An open question,
however, is what exactly the MPFC does in contributing to the sense of self. I propose
that the search engine Google provides an analogy for MPFC functioning. Google links
together information from different Internet sites and tries to interpret what the searcher
is looking for. Accordingly, the Google model of self proposes that MPFC integrates and
interprets the output of neural activity across widely distributed brain networks. This talk
focuses on the affective nature of self, such as the neural basis of self-esteem and
positivity biases.
CAN ABERRANT PATTERNS OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BE MODIFIED?
AND, IF SO, WOULD IT MATTER?
Alex Martin – National Institute of Mental Health
Recently, there has been tremendous progress in our ability to uncover the intrinsic,
large-scale functional architecture of the human brain by evaluating the covariation of
spontaneously fluctuating neural signals during the so-called ‘resting state’. One of the
most interesting aspects of this research has been the discovery that patterns of
functional connectivity at rest can predict subsequent task performance in normal
subjects, as well as clinical outcome in neuropsychiatric patients (Plitt et al., PNAS,
2016). My talk will focus on our recent attempt to directly modify aberrant patterns of
functional connectivity in patients with autism by using implicit, real-time, fMRI-based
neurofeedback to strengthen between-region connectivity. Our results suggest that fMRI
neurofeedback can directly alter complex, clinically-relevant patterns of connectivity,
potentially leading to improved clinical outcome.

	

21

Saturday, March 18 2017
Coffee & Snacks
Saturday, March 18 2017
8:00 – 9:00 AM

Symposium

Social and Reward Learning
Saturday, March 18 2017
9:00 – 10:15 AM
Chaired by: Jennifer Silvers, University of California, Los Angeles
Andreas Olsson, Karolinska Institutet
Oriel FeldmanHall, Brown University
Yina Ma, Beijing Normal University
Adriana Galván, University of California, Los Angeles

ABSTRACTS
NEW APPROACHES TO THE SOCIAL TRANSMISSION AND LEARNING OF
AFFECTIVE INFORMATION
Andreas Olsson – Karolinska Institutet
In rapidly changing environments, humans and other animals often use the behavior of
others to learn about what should be approached and avoided. In humans, the unique
expressiveness of the face enables the transmission of a wide range of value-based
information, from the painfulness of a shock to the inappropriateness of a social
interaction. In contrast to learning from direct, personal, experiences, little is known
about the mechanisms underlying these forms of social learning. I will discuss studies
using behavioral, imaging, and pharmacological techniques examining both the sender
and receiver during various forms of social learning. Consistent with research across
species, our results show that social threat and safety learning draw on processes
partially shared with direct conditioning and extinction learning, respectively.
Importantly, the outcome of social learning depends on features of both the sender and
receiver.
STIMULUS GENERALIZATION AS A MECHANISM FOR LEARNING WHO TO
TRUST
Oriel FeldmanHall – Brown University; Joseph Dunsmoor – New York University; Alexa
Tompary – New York University; Lindsay Hunter – Princeton University; Alexander
Todorov – Princeton University; Elizabeth Phelps – New York University
Through repeated encounters humans can learn to trust. Yet humans constantly meet
new individuals where judgments of trustworthiness are blind to reputation. In these
cases, what drives decisions to trust strangers? We test whether the ability to generalize
across stimuli and situations—an essential feature of adaptive learning—underpin novel

	22

decisions to trust unfamiliar others; and, whether such a mechanism recruits a gradient
of structurally similar neural patterns. Subjects first play an iterative Trust Game with
three players who are highly trustworthy, somewhat trustworthy, and highly
untrustworthy. Subjects then select partners for a future Trust Game. Unbeknownst to
the subject, each potential new partner was parametrically morphed with one of the
three players from the original game. Results reveal a preference for strangers (in reality,
morphs) that resemble an individual previously learned to be trustworthy. In contrast,
subjects strongly preferred not to play with a morph that even partially resembled
someone they learned was untrustworthy (i.e. overgeneralization or a ‘better safe than
sorry’ strategy). An imaging experiment replicated these findings, demonstrating BOLD
activity in the amygdala tracks increasing perceptual similarity along the untrustworthy
gradient. Multivariate representational similarity analyses further reveal increasingly
similar patterns of activity in the amygdala selectively index adaptive decisions to
withhold trust from individuals baring perceptual resemblance to the untrustworthy
player. Additionally, we observed that striatal representational patterns broadly track
adaptive choices in both trustworthy and untrustworthy domains. Together, these data
demonstrate a novel behavioral and neural mechanism for how humans adaptively learn
to trust during dynamic social environments.
NEUROCOMPUTATION OF SOCIAL VALUES: DISTINCT OXYTOCIN EFFECTS IN
INDIVIDUALISTS AND PROSOCIALS
Yina Ma – Beijing Normal University
Computation of social values is fundamentally important for understanding social
interactions, but the underlying neurobiological mechanisms remain elusive. Here, by
integrating functional MRI and pharmacological challenge, we investigate the contribution
of a neuropeptide, oxytocin (OT) to social preferences of the division of resources and
the underlying neurocomputational mechanisms. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled
between-subject procedure, we asked people with prosocial or individualistic social
orientation to evaluate the desirability of pairs of rewards for the self and the other. We
computed subjective preference based on the weights of allocentric and egocentric
distance on the desirability evaluation of reward pairs and found that subjective
preferences aligned well with individual's social orientation. The distance between reward
distribution and individual's subjective preference is encoded in the amygdala and ventral
tegmental area, the activity of which positively predicts individual differences in inequality
aversion. Moreover, we demonstrate a normalization effect of intranasal OT on the
behavioral and neural responses, making individualists less egocentric and prosocials less
allocentric by increasing amygdala activity in individualists, but decreasing that in
prosocials. This normalization effect of OT remains unchanged in a competitive (“winner
takes all”) context, suggesting a generic role of OT in social value representation. Taken
together, our findings suggest a new functional role of OT in social interactions in
affecting encoding of social values by modulating amygdala activity.
BETTER LEARNING IN ADOLESCENTS THAN ADULTS: THE ROLE OF THE
DEVELOPING BRAIN
Adriana Galván – University of California, Los Angeles
Adolescents are notorious for making risky decisions, a tendency attributed to heightened
activity in the brain’s reward systems during adolescence. It has been suggested that
reward sensitivity in adolescence might also be behaviorally adaptive, but evidence of
such an adaptive role has been scarce. Using a probabilistic reinforcement learning task
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in humans, we found that adolescents
showed enhanced learning from reinforcement. This enhanced learning in adolescents
was associated with a stronger link between reinforcement learning and episodic memory
for rewarding outcomes, with greater activation in the hippocampus, and with greater
functional connectivity between the hippocampus and the striatum during learning.

	

23

These findings reveal an important role for the hippocampus in supporting reinforcement
learning in adolescence. More broadly, they suggest that reward sensitivity in
adolescence is related to adaptive differences in how adolescents learn from experience.

Posters

Poster Session C & Coffee Break
Saturday, March 18 2017
10:15 – 11:45 AM
See page 83 for abstracts.

Award
Address

Distinguished Scholar Address
Saturday, March 18 2017
11:45 AM – 12:45 PM
Introduced by: Leah Somerville, Harvard University
BJ Casey, Yale University

ABSTRACT
SELF CONTROL: WHEN SOCIAL AND AFFECTIVE PROCESSES OVERSHADOW
COGNITIVE PROCESSES
BJ Casey – Yale University
Emotions impact our choices and actions across many social interactions throughout the
course of a day. These emotional and social interactions often require cognitive control the ability to suppress inappropriate emotions, desires or impulses in favor of goal
oriented ones. A key question that has driven our research over the last decade is in
what contexts do these social and affective processes diminish or enhance cognitive
control and how do circuit-based models account for observed behavioral differences in
these contexts? This presentation will highlight a series of studies that investigate
behavioral and neural correlates of cognitive control in emotionally charged and social
situations based on developmental, individual and group factors. The first series of
experiments examine adolescent specific changes in the ability to exercise control in the
context of rewards, potential threats and social cues and highlight the importance of
hierarchical changes in the development and function of prefrontal and limbic circuitry.
The second series of experiments examine how individual differences in cognitive control
early in life, as measured by delay of gratification, can predict impulsive actions up to 40
years later. The last series of experiments examine how the ability to exercise self
control in emotionally arousing situations is impacted by sociocultural group information.
Together, these studies suggest that emotional states of arousal interact with
developmental, individual and sociocultural group factors to differentially modulate our
actions. These results point to the importance of understanding the specific situational
factors that can diminish and enhance our capacity for self control.

	24

Lunch & ABCD Q & A
Saturday, March 18 2017
12:45 – 2:00 PM
Buffet lunch provided on the Centennial Terrace Deck.
1:15 – 1:45 PM: Optional ABCD (Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development) Study
Q & A Session led by: BJ Casey, Yale University (Centennial Ballroom A/B)

Blitz Talks

Trainee Data Blitz
Saturday, March 18 2017
2:00 – 3:00 PM
Chaired by: Lauren Atlas, National Institutes of Health
Eshin Jolly, Dartmouth College
Ian Roberts, The Ohio State University
Meghan Meyer, Princeton University
Song Qi, Caltech; Columbia University
Julian Wills, New York University
Jie Hu, Peking University
Regina Lapate, University of California, Berkeley

ABSTRACTS
SPONTANEOUS MENTALIZING ABOUT PARASOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS
Eshin Jolly – Dartmouth College; Jin Hyun Cheong – Dartmouth College; Luke Chang –
Dartmouth College
Individuals spend a significant amount of their lives thinking about other people. These
thoughts typically involve close personal relationships, but can also involve parasocial
relationships, i.e. fantasies about distant others’ lives such as celebrities, athletes, or
fictional characters. One reason for this behavior may be that individuals actively
simulate what it might be like to live someone else’s life and imagine the benefits from
doing so. Using characters from a TV drama (Friday Night Lights), we examined this
phenomenon in a three part paradigm where participants (1) watched an episode of the
show, (2) passively viewed photographs of the main characters in the scanner, and (3)
rated how much they wanted to be each character. We found evidence supporting the
hypothesis that individuals spontaneously engaged in mental simulation and valuation of
others. Whole brain contrasts of participants’ most highly and least highly rated
characters revealed clusters in regions involved in social cognition (dmPFC) and valuation
(NAcc). Furthermore, a whole brain multivariate regression model successfully predicted
participants’ ratings with a modest, but reliable degree of accuracy. Consistent with
univariate results, regions involved in social cognition and valuation were amongst the

	

25

features of the model that most strongly contributed to the prediction. These findings
suggest that individuals spontaneously simulate others’ lives during a passive viewing
task, and demonstrate how machine learning approaches can be used to uncover
psychological processes even in the absence of an explicit task.
ACETAMINOPHEN REDUCES THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL EXPECTATIONS ON
ECONOMIC DECISION-MAKING VIA DAMPENED AFFECT
Ian Roberts – The Ohio State University; Ian Krajbich – The Ohio State University; Paul
E. Stillman – The Ohio State University; William A. Cunningham – University of Toronto;
Baldwin M. Way – The Ohio State University
Our recent work has shown that acetaminophen not only blunts pain, but also affective
evaluations (Durso et al., 2015). To determine the behavioral effects of affective blunting
by acetaminophen, we examined the effects of acetaminophen in a series of economic
games across multiple studies. In two studies, acetaminophen reduced the impact of
both favorable and unfavorable expectations, which caused trust game investors to
invest more when they expected low returns from the trustee but invested less when
they expected high returns, relative to placebo. In other words, the direction of drug
effect changed with different expectations. In study 3, acetaminophen reduced the effect
of varying fairness expectations on offer acceptance in an ultimatum game.
Acetaminophen also caused trust game trustees to adhere less to their beliefs about
investors’ expectations when deciding how much to return. This reduced reciprocity was
accompanied by reduced guilt when the same trustees were asked how they would feel if
they had returned less. To identify the neural mechanisms of acetaminophen’s affect
dampening effects and the implications for economic decision-making, we are conducting
an fMRI study in which participants evaluate affective stimuli (i.e., IAPS images). The
relationship between affective neural responses and subsequent social economic choices
outside the scanner will be examined. Overall, our behavioral findings are the first to
show an over-the-counter medication to affect the fundamental social processes of trust,
fairness, and reciprocity. Furthermore, our results demonstrate the importance of
considering social psychological context (e.g., social expectations) when studying the
behavioral effects of drugs.
EVIDENCE THAT DEFAULT NETWORK CONNECTIVITY DURING REST
CONSOLIDATES SOCIAL INFORMATION
Meghan Meyer – Princeton University
Over the past few decades a lingering question has pervaded social neuroscience
research: why do the same brain regions that support social cognition also spontaneously
engage during rest? Building off of past research suggesting that rest is a time when new
information is committed to memory, this study tested whether one function of MPFC
and TPJ engagement during rest may be to consolidate new social information.
Replicating past work, MPFC-TPJ resting state functional connectivity was enhanced
during a baseline rest period. Critically, these regions significantly increased functional
connectivity during rest following the acquisition of new social information, and this
effect correlated with superior social associative memory performance. Given the
importance of successfully navigating the social world, the tendency to engage MPFC and
TPJ during rest may tune people towards social learning.
HOW SURVIVAL CIRCUITS OPTIMIZE ESCAPE DECISIONS IN HUMANS
Song Qi – Caltech, Columbia University; Demis Hassabis – Google DeepMind; Brian Suen
– Columbia University; Fangjian Guo – Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Nathaniel
Daw – Princeton University; Dean Mobbs – Caltech, Columbia University
Flight initiation distance (FID), the distance at which an organism flees from an
approaching threat, is an ecological metric of cost-benefit functions of escape. In the
context of changing reward and threat values, we used looming artificial predators with

	26

varying attack distances to examine escape decisions. We showed that rapid escape
decisions relied on reflexive fear circuits in the midbrain and anterior mid-cingulate cortex
(aMCC). Protracted escape decisions, defined by larger buffer zones, were associated
with posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), hippocampus and ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) circuits implicated in behavioral flexibility and strategic decision-making. Using a
Bayesian decision model, we also found that the optimal levels of subjects’ decision
making under rapid and protracted escape decisions were differentially associated with
aMCC and bilateral hippocampus activity, respectively. Our findings suggest that survival
circuits that support fear and anxiety in humans, also give rise to optimal flight decisions
associated with the attack distance.
SHIFTING PROSOCIAL INTUITIONS: NEURAL EVIDENCE FOR A PERSON X
SITUATION ACCOUNT OF GROUP-BASED COOPERATION
Julian Wills – New York University; Leor Hackel – Stanford University; Jay Van Bavel –
New York University
Cooperation is essential for adaptive group living. However, the neurocognitive basis of
this behavior remains controversial, as different models have proposed different roles for
intuitive and deliberative processing. Dual-process models argue cooperation stems from
intuition (versus deliberation). In contrast, value-based decision models argue that
intuitive processing depends on the strength of one’s prosocial preferences, as well as
any contextual factors that shift these preferences. We tested whether neural activity
implicated in intuition and deliberation is modulated by prosocial preferences and social
norms. While undergoing fMRI, subjects played a public goods game with students from
two fictitious universities where the norm was either free-riding (antisocial school) or
cooperating (prosocial school). Participants who were more prosocial overall showed
greater ventromedial prefrontal cortical (VMPFC) activity when cooperating and
heightened connectivity between VMPFC and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)
when free-riding, demonstrating that individual prosocial preferences modulated the
contribution of brain regions implicated in intuition and deliberation. Moreover, among
norm-sensitive subjects, deviating from the group norm involved greater DLPFC-VMPFC
connectivity. As a result, these findings suggest the relative contribution of intuition or
deliberation may critically hinge on prosocial preferences rooted in individual dispositions
and contextual norms. Furthermore, these findings affirm value-based decision models in
favor of dual-process theories of cooperation.
VMPFC MEDIATES THE EFFECT OF TRAIT EMPATHY ON OTHER-REGARDING
TENDENCIES IN ALTRUISTIC BEHAVIOR
Jie Hu – Peking University; Yue Li – Peking University; Philip R. Blue – Peking University;
Xiaolin Zhou – Peking University
Why do we help others at a cost to ourselves? One line of research suggests that
empathic concern for others’ welfare is central to altruistic behavior, while another line of
research suggests that value-based computation of costs and benefits drives altruistic
behavior. However, whether and to what extent these two sub-processes (i.e. empathic
concern and value-based computation) act together to influence altruistic behavior is still
unclear. Here, we examined participants’ altruistic behavior by asking them to perform a
task in which they decided whether to donate a certain amount of money to help others
avoid a certain amount of unpleasant noise stimulation. We used a computational model
to fit the behavioral data and calculate the weight that the participants assign to others’
suffering when deciding whether to help. This weight was taken as a measure of
participants’ other-regarding tendency. Behaviorally, we found that participants’ otherregarding tendencies correlated positively with their trait empathy scores. Neuroimaging
results showed that participants’ other-regarding tendencies correlated positively with
activity in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) when they decided to act altruistically,
as opposed to when they decided to act selfishly. Importantly, this activity in vmPFC

	

27

mediated the relationship between trait empathy and other-regarding tendency. Thus,
our findings highlight the importance of empathic concern in the value-based
computation of altruistic behavior.
LATERAL PREFRONTAL FUNCTION CAUSALLY DETERMINES THE
PERVASIVENESS OF AFFECT
Regina C. Lapate – University of California, Berkeley; Richard J. Davidson – University of
Wisconsin-Madison
Emotional events can rapidly shape one’s behavior. Optimal functioning in everyday life
therefore requires the ability to efficiently override reflexive emotional responses and
prevent the spillover of affect to situations or people unrelated to the source of emotion.
Across two affect misattribution studies, we demonstrate that this ubiquitous and implicit
form of context-appropriate emotion regulation depends on intact lateral prefrontal
(LPFC) function. In both studies, participants evaluated the likeability of novel neutral
faces after being briefly exposed to a negative or positive stimulus. First, in an fMRI
experiment, we found that the magnitude of affective misattribution correlated with
LPFC-amygdala coupling during negative emotional-stimulus processing. Next, we used
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) to temporarily inhibit LPFC function and test the
causal role of this region in regulating the influence of emotional information on
subsequent social evaluations. We found that while the incidental emotional information
did not influence likeability of novel neutral faces in the control condition (when LPFC
was operative), LPFC inhibition produced a significant bias in participants’ ratings of novel
faces according to the previously-processed emotion. Remarkably, TMS-induced emotion
misattribution was long lasting: Biased first impressions formed during LPFC inhibition
were still detectable outside of the laboratory 3 days after the TMS session—suggesting
that a rapid, one-trial emotional learning can take place when LPFC function is perturbed,
in the absence of alterations to mood or explicit memory. Collectively, these findings
indicate that the LPFC serves an important emotion-regulatory function in preventing
incidental emotional encoding from automatically biasing social behavior.

Coffee Break
Saturday, March 18 2017
3:00 – 3:15 PM

Symposium

Novel Approaches to Studying Social and Affective
Processes
Saturday, March 18 2017
3:15 – 4:30 PM
Chaired by: Carolyn Parkinson, University of California, Los Angeles
Bill Kelley, Dartmouth College
Asieh Zadbood, Princeton University

	28

Richard Betzel, University of Pennsylvania
Hakwan Lau, University of California, Los Angeles

ABSTRACTS
COMBINING FMRI AND MOBILE SENSING TECHNOLOGY TO STUDY THE
SOCIAL BRAIN
Bill Kelley – Dartmouth College
There is a growing trend in social and affective neuroscience to use brain data obtained
in fMRI to predict real world behavior. Our research uses recently developed applications
of network analysis to assess resting state functional connectivity (RSFC). We examine
the functional coupling of brain networks in the absence of task demands, patterns of
statistical coherence across brain regions that arise throughout development, in a
manner that permits assessment of a network’s integrity. The guiding hypothesis of this
research is that individual differences in the integrity of RSFC networks can predict
individual differences in appetitive behavior, social behavior, vulnerability to stress and
their relation to self-affect. An important innovation in this work is the automated
collection of relevant behavioral data through passive smartphone sensing to infer
human dynamics and behavior. For example, mobile sensing applications can
automatically and accurately infer activity measures (stationary, walking, running,
driving, cycling), sleep duration, and sociability (e.g., the number of independent
conversations and their durations). We discuss how the combination of fMRI, smartphone
sensing technology, and ecological momentary assessments show great promise for
understanding changes in social behavior and affect, including prediction of development
of mood or anxiety disorders.
HOW DO WE SHARE OUR MEMORIES WITH OTHER BRAINS?
Asieh Zadbood – Princeton University; Janice Chen – Princeton University; Yuan Chang
Leong – Stanford University; Kenneth Norman – Princeton University; Uri Hasson –
Princeton University
In daily life we often recall and share our past experiences (an episode that occurred this
morning, a movie we watched last night, etc) using language. Strikingly, people who
listen to these stories are able to imagine details of the episode which they have not
personally experienced. However, it is unknown how strongly the neural patterns elicited
by imagining specific episodes in the listener’s brain resemble the neural states elicited
during the original encoding of those episodes in the speaker’s brain. In the current
study, using fMRI and a natural communication task, we traced how neural patterns
associated with specific scenes of a movie are encoded, verbally recalled, and then
transferred to a group of naïve listeners. By comparing neural patterns across the three
conditions, we report that event-specific neural patterns are observed in the default
mode network (DMN) and shared across the encoding, reinstatement (spoken recall),
and imagination of the same real-life episode. This study uncovers the intimate
correspondences between memory encoding and imagination, and highlights the
essential role that our common language plays in the process of transmitting one's
experiences to other brains.
POSITIVE AFFECT, SURPRISE, AND FATIGUE ARE CORRELATES OF NETWORK
FLEXIBILITY
Richard Betzel – University of Pennsylvania
Advances in neuroimaging have made it possible to reconstruct functional networks from
the activity patterns of brain regions distributed across the cerebral cortex. Recent work
has shown that flexible reconfiguration of human brain networks over short timescales
supports cognitive flexibility and learning. However, modulating network flexibility to

	

29

enhance learning requires an understanding of an as-yet unknown relationship between
flexibility and brain state. Here, we investigate the relationship between network
flexibility and affect, leveraging an unprecedented longitudinal data set. We demonstrate
that indices associated with positive mood and surprise are both associated with network
flexibility -- positive mood portends a more flexible brain while increased levels of
surprise portend a less flexible brain. In both cases, these relationships are driven
predominantly by a subset of brain regions comprising the somatomotor system. Our
results simultaneously suggest a network-level mechanism underlying learning deficits in
mood disorders as well as a potential target -- altering an individual's mood or task
novelty -- to improve learning.
UNCONSCIOUS FEAR REDUCTION VIA DECODED FMRI NEUROFEEDBACK
Hakwan Lau – University of California, Los Angeles
Procedures to extinguish fear generally involve repeated presentation of unreinforced
fear-conditioned cues. However, exposure to feared cues is itself aversive, and thus limits
its clinical applicability. Using real-time fMRI with multivariate decoding, we extinguished
fear by directly reinforcing the activation patterns in visual cortex that resembled the
decoded features of feared visual stimuli. Participants then went through Pavlovian
conditioning, and acquired fear for the two conditioned stimuli (CS+) as they were paired
with electric shocks. Afterwards, participants went through three days of neural
reinforcement sessions during which they were rewarded on a trial-by-trial basis when
the activation patterns in V1/V2 resembled the previously decoded patterns for one of
the CS+ (Target) but not for the other (Control). Participants were not informed of the
purpose of this procedure, and post-session tests confirmed they were not consciously
aware of the occurrence of the neural representation of Target CS+ during the Neural
reinforcement sessions. Nevertheless, participants showed reduced fear response for the
Target CS+ relative to the Control CS+. These results show that fear can be reduced
without explicit reactivation of the fear memory, and this procedure may support new
treatments for fear-related disorders such as phobia and post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), via unconscious processing. I further speculate how we can apply the same
approach to move towards a placebo-controlled clinical psychology.

Presidential Closing Remarks
Saturday, March 18 2017
4:30 – 5:00 PM
Paul Whalen, Dartmouth College
SANS President

	30

Poster Session A
Thursday, March 16, 5:15 – 6:45 PM
A – 1 *SANS Poster Award winner*
EMPATHIC ACCURACY IN NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE: DIAGNOSTIC DIFFERENCES AND NEURAL
CORRELATES
Casey L. Brown – University of California, Berkeley; Alice Y. Hua – University of California, Berkeley; Howard J. Rosen
– University of California, San Francisco; Bruce P. Miller – University of California, San Francisco; Robert W. Levenson
– University of California, Berkeley
Empathic accuracy, the ability to recognize other’s emotions, is critical for social functioning. Neuroimaging and
neurological studies of empathic accuracy often examine individuals’ ability to identify emotions shown in static
photographs. These tasks fail to capture the dynamic ways emotions unfold over time in interpersonal contexts.
Deficits in empathic accuracy can be caused by neurodegenerative disease. However, to our knowledge, no studies
have investigated differences in empathic accuracy between types of neurodegenerative diseases using a dynamic
tracking task. 186 patients with a variety of neurodegenerative diseases and 22 controls watch a film of an actress
experiencing a range of emotions. Participants used a rating dial to indicate how the actress was feeling
continuously. Empathic accuracy was determined by computing time-lagged cross correlations between participant
ratings and ratings obtained from an expert panel. Findings revealed that patients with Alzheimer’s disease,
behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia, and progressive supranuclear palsy had significantly lower empathic
accuracy compared to controls. Additionally, we used whole brain voxel-based morphometry to examine the neural
correlates of empathic accuracy in 181 of these participants. Grey matter atrophy in a large bilateral cluster was
associated with lower empathic accuracy, including regions involved in the recognition of emotion such as the
superior medial frontal gyrus, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and insula (pFWE <.05).
Atrophy in the right precuneus, left superior parietal gyrus, and bilateral postcentral gyrus also predicted lower
empathic accuracy (p<.001). These findings highlight the neural networks involved in real-world empathic accuracy.
A – 2 *SANS Poster Award winner*
THE ROLE OF THE SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX IN PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOUR. FROM CORRELATION TO
CAUSALITY
Selene Gallo – Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience; Riccardo Paracampo – University of Bologna; Laura MüllerPinzler – Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience; Mario Severo – Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience; Christian
Keysers – Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience; Valeria Gazzola – Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience
Witnessing another persons’ suffering elicits vicarious brain activity in areas active when we ourselves are in pain.
Using EEG, we investigated if highlighting the somatic origin of the observed pain alters the vicarious activity of the
somatosensory cortex (S1) and whether the magnitude of the activity predicts prosocial behaviour (1st experiment).
Then we test the causal involvement of the region in helping (2ndexperiment) using Transcranial Magnetic
Stimulation (TMS). First, 28 participants underwent a costly helping paradigm. They witnessed a confederate
receiving (a) a slap on the hand, with only the hand visible, highlighting the somatosensory component of pain
(Hand-Videos) or (b) an electroshock on the hand with a visible facial expression of pain highlighting unpleasantness
(Face-Videos). Participants could help by donating money. Using beamforming source reconstruction we identified S1
activity to be stronger while watching the Hand- than Face-Videos. Importantly the left-S1 activity could predict trialby-trial amounts donated for both Video-types. In the second (ongoing) experiment, 10 participants performed the
task under TMS over the left-S1 and under sham-stimulation. While viewing Hand-Videos, TMS selectively interfered
with the relationship between intensity of the stimulation shown in the video and donation. In conclusion, S1
vicarious brain activation while watching somebody in pain can predict the helping behavioural outcome: the more
the pain is shared, the more we are willing to help. This relationship is disrupted by TMS supporting the functional
relevance of S1 in calibrating prosociality to the situation when the somatosensory component of pain is highlighted.
A – 3 *SANS Poster Award winner*
EXPLORING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES AND THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL
ACROSS DEVELOPMENT
Joao F. Guassi Moreira – University of California, Los Angeles; Katie A. McLaughlin – University of Washington;
Jennifer A. Silvers – University of California, Los Angeles
Learning to regulate one’s emotions is a critical developmental milestone. In the past two decades, dozens of studies
in adults have informed our knowledge about the neural bases of cognitive reappraisal – an emotion regulation
strategy that involves changing the meaning of an emotional stimulus so as to alter its emotional import. However,
research examining how reappraisal emerges during childhood and adolescence remains in its nascence. To examine

	

31

age-related effects associated with cognitive reappraisal, we collected fMRI data on 86 youths aged 8-17
(Mage=12.79 years, 42F) while they completed a reappraisal task. Specifically, participants were shown aversive and
neutral images and were instructed before each trial to look at the image as they normally would or to reappraise by
distancing. Across the sample, reappraisal significantly reduced negative affect (t=-6.32, p<.001, d=-.57), but
reappraisal success did not vary as a function of age (r=.19, p=.116). Neuroimaging results replicate prior work in
adults showing that reappraising negative images, recruits vlPFC and vmPFC (Z = 3.18, xyz = [-26, 50, -14,], k =
661, p<.05). Age and individual differences in regulation success were explored as variables of interest. Regardless
of age, reappraisal success was associated with greater vlPFC and ventral striatum activity whereas increased age
predicted greater recruitment of cortical midline and cingulate areas. These data suggest that while effective
reappraisal relies on prefrontal and control circuitry across the lifespan, neurodevelopmental changes in reappraisal
may instead hinge on age-related improvements in the ability to self-monitor and engage in perspective taking while
reappraising.
A – 4 *SANS Poster Award winner*
EFFECTS OF GROUP MEMBERSHIP ON OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING
Pyungwon Kang – University of Zurich; Grit Hein – University of Zurich; Chris Burke – University of Zurich; Philippe
Tobler – University of Zurich
Learning from others (observational learning) can be affected by social context such as the learner’s relation with the
observed person. One of the strongest social context factors is group membership but it is an open question whether
group membership also influences observational learning. In this study, we investigated whether and how
observational learning from ingroup members differs from observational learning from outgroup members.
Specifically, our hypothesis was that individuals learn faster when observing ingroup members than when observing
outgroup members. We recruited thirty two participants for an fMRI experiment. Prior to the fMRI scan, we induced
group identification based on political attitude. Next, participants performed an observational learning task in the
scanner. Participants observed ingroup and outgroup members learning by trial and error which one of two options
was associated with higher reward probability and were free to use the acquired knowledge for their own decisions.
Finally, the participants also learned individually, without previous observational phase. Participants performed better
when they observed the decisions of ingroup members than the decisions of outgroup members. In the neural data,
we found that during the outcome phase TPJ activation was greater for ingroup members compared to outgroup
members. Moreover, TPJ activation was related to the observer’s performance and increased as individuals identified
more strongly with ingroup members. These results suggest that processing of social outcomes is enhanced during
observational learning from ingroup members and related to the strength of ingroup identification.
A – 5 *SANS Poster Award winner*
SEEING WHAT WE WANT TO SEE: MOTIVATION SHAPES PERCEPTUAL JUDGMENTS AND CATEGORYSELECTIVE ACTIVITY IN THE VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM
Yuan Chang Leong – Stanford University; Brent Hughes – University of California, Riverside; Jamil Zaki – Stanford
University
People often trust their visual system to construct an objective representation of the physical world. Yet, previous
work suggests that goals, desires and wants can influence what people see. In this study, we explored the neural
mechanisms underlying motivational influences on visual perception. Human participants were presented with images
comprising a mixture of a face and a scene in different proportions while we measured their BOLD response using
fMRI. Participants were tasked to categorize whether each image predominantly displayed a face or a scene, and
were rewarded for each correct categorization. We manipulated the category participants were motivated to see by
instructing them that they would win or lose extra money if the upcoming image was of a particular category. Even
though the reward maximizing strategy was to perform the classification as accurately as possible, the additional
financial incentive shifted participants’ sensitivity to the motivation-consistent category - for the same face to scene
ratio, participants were more likely to categorize an image as belonging to a category if they were motivated to see
that category. We then applied multi-voxel pattern analysis methods to participants’ BOLD response to quantify the
level of face-selective and scene-selective activity in the ventral visual stream, and found evidence for enhanced
category-selective activity for the motivation-consistent category during presentation of the ambiguous composite
images. Our results suggest that motivation influence perceptual judgments via gain control mechanisms that
increase the neural sensitivity to motivation-consistent perceptual features.
A – 6 *SANS Poster Award winner*
IDENTIFYING CHANGES IN THE EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS OF OTHERS: ADOLESCENT-SPECIFIC
SALIENCE NETWORK RECRUITMENT THAT REDICTS SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
Maya L. Rosen – University of Washington; Margaret A. Sheridan – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Kelly A.
Sambrook – University of Washington; Meg J. Dennisont – University of Washington; Jessica L. Jenness – University

	32

of Washington; Mary K. Askren – University of Washington; Andrew N. Meltzoff – University of Washington; Katie A.
McLaughlin – University of Washington
The ability to hold in mind information about the emotional states of others is critical to guide social behavior.
Adolescence is a unique developmental period when the salience of social and emotional information becomes
particularly pronounced. Although this pattern has frequently been considered with respect to risk behaviors and
psychopathology, evidence suggests that increased adolescent sensitivity to social and emotional cues might confer
advantages. For example, greater sensitivity to shifts in the emotions of others is likely to promote flexible and
adaptive social behavior. In this study, a sample of 54 children and adolescents (age 8-19 years) performed a
delayed match-to-sample task for emotional faces while undergoing fMRI scanning. Recruitment of the dorsal
anterior cingulate and anterior insula when the emotion of the probe face did not match the emotion held in memory
was observed during a limited developmental window in early adolescence. These findings indicate meaningful
developmental variation in the neural mechanisms underlying sensitivity to changes in the emotional expressions.
Across all participants, greater activation of this network for changes in emotional expression was associated with
less social anxiety and fewer social problems. These results suggest that the heightened salience of social and
emotional information during adolescence may confer important advantages for social behavior, providing sensitivity
to others’ emotions that facilitates flexible social responding.
A – 7 *SANS Poster Award winner*
DO HOSTILE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENTS PROMOTE SOCIAL DEVIANCE BY SHAPING NEURAL RESPONSE
TO SOCIAL EXCLUSION? AN FMRI STUDY IN MEXICAN-ORIGIN ADOLESCENTS
Roberta A. Schriber – University of California, Davis; Christina R. Rogers – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill;
Emilio Ferrer – University of California, Davis; Rand D. Conger – University of California, Davis; Richard W. Robins –
University of California, Davis; Paul D. Hastings – University of California, Davis; Amanda E. Guyer – University of
California, Davis
Ideally, schools provide a nurturing setting for learning and growing, including during adolescence, a time of
enormous biological and social change. However, some schools are characterized by high levels of hostility that may
sensitize youths to interpersonal threat and promote antisocial behavior. The present study examined how adolescent
neural response to social exclusion was associated with earlier exposure to a hostile school environment (HSE) and
future social deviance. Participants (166 Mexican-origin adolescents, 55% female, 16-17 years old) reported on their
observation of discrimination and violence at school annually across grades 9-11. Subsequently, neural response to
experimentally manipulated social exclusion was measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Finally, social deviance as reflected in adolescents’ self-reported antisocial behaviors and affiliations with deviant
peers was measured in grade 12 (and in grade 9 for use as a covariate). Results showed that greater HSE exposure
prospectively predicted greater response to social exclusion in subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (subACC), a region
of interest from the “social pain” network that has also been linked to social susceptibility. Furthermore, greater
subACC sensitivity to social exclusion mediated the association between adolescents’ previous HSE exposures and
their later deviant behaviors. Of note, this neurobiological path was moderated by earlier levels of family
connectedness. Adolescents reporting stronger versus weaker family bonds showed no relation between their neural
response to social exclusion and later deviant behavior. These findings suggest complex interplay of risk and
protective factors across adolescents’ social settings that impact adolescent socioemotional development through the
brain.
A–8
IMPAIRED PV AND PNN EXPRESSION IN CA1 HIPPOCAMPUS MAY UNDERLIE CONTEXTUAL DEFICITS
AFTER AUDITORY FEAR CONDITIONING IN FMR1 KNOCKOUT MICE
Sonia Afroz – University of California, Riverside; Sarah Reinhard – University of California, Riverside; Pendi Kasim –
University of California, Riverside; Hanania Yasmien – University of California, Riverside; Ethell Iryna – University of
California, Riverside; Razak Khaleel – University of California, Riverside
Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is a neurological disorder characterized by behavioral and cognitive deficits. FXS results
from increased methylation of the Fragile X Mental Retardation 1 (FMR1) gene, reducing transcription of the FMR1
gene. This study investigated how FXS affects fear and anxiety in mice following auditory fear conditioning. WT and
FMR1 KO mice were tested with a standardized fear conditioning protocol consisting of habituation, training, and
extinction. Tone and context recall were measured as a percentage of freezing behavior. While tone recall did not
significantly differ between genotypes, FMR1 KO mice experienced a deficit in context recall when compared to WT.
This context-specific deficit prompted hippocampal immunostaining of the CA1 and the dentate gyrus (DG) for
changes in cell densities following behavior. Parvalbumin (PV) cells, perineuronal networks (PNN), and co-localized
PV and PNN were stained in both WT and FMR1 KO. Prior to fear conditioning, FMR1 KO mice showed decreased PV
density in the DG compared to WT. PV density was further reduced in FMR1 KO following behavior. A general
decrease in PNN cell density was noted for WT, but FMR1 KO mice experienced decreased PNN density particularly

	

33

around pyramidal cells of the CA1. Furthermore, co-localization increased in WT with behavior, but decreased in the
CA1 for FMR1 KO mice. Prominent density shifts occurred within the CA1 of FMR1 KO mice, suggesting contextual
deficits may be attributed to CA1 imbalances. By exploring the behavioral and cellular mechanism of FXS, our study
advances the framework necessary for future treatment options.
A–9
EXAMINING THE EFFECTS OF STEREOTYPE-BASED STRESS CONTAGION ON DYADIC MATH
PERFORMANCE IN PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING CONTEXTS
Rachel C. Amey	–	University of Delaware; Adam B. Magerman	–	University of Delaware; Mengting Liu – University of
Delaware; Tessa V. West –	New York University; Kate Thorson	–	New York University; Chad E. Forbes –	University of
Delaware
Group-based learning approaches such as the Problem Based Learning (PBL) method have become increasingly
popular, particularly in STEM domains. While sometimes effective, PBL contexts might also readily engender
stereotype threats (ST; i.e., stressful performance situations where negative stereotypes about women’s math ability
are salient) among women in STEM classes because many cues that trigger ST are prevalent in PBL contexts (e.g.,
men outnumbering women in STEM domains). Past research has extensively documented the negative downstream
consequences of ST on women and their disidentification and disengagement, however, all of this research has
occurred at the individual level; thus a critical question is whether the deleterious stress-oriented consequences of ST
on individuals can be transmitted to other, otherwise non-threatened women, in a process we refer to as stereotypebased stress contagion. The current study examined how stereotype-based stress contagion altered interactions
among women in a dyadic performance context while continuous EEG activity was recorded. Results revealed that ST
actors’ emotional reactivity to negative performance feedback, operationalized as increased connectivity between
brain regions integral for emotion-related processes, predicted increased connectivity in the same emotion network
among non-threatened female partners in response to negative feedback on subsequent trials. Furthermore,
increased emotion network connectivity in ST actors predicted decreased performance in their partner over time.
These relationships were not evident when actors were placed in stereotype-neutral contexts. Findings suggest how
stereotype-based stress contagion may manifest in group learning contexts to promote negative downstream
consequences among both individuals experiencing ST and their non-threatened female peers.
A – 10
AFFERENT CARDIAC SIGNALS MODULATE ATTENTIONAL ENGAGEMENT TO LOW SPATIAL FREQUENCY
FEARFUL FACES
Ruben T. Azevedo	–	The Warburg Institute, University of London; Deborah Badoud – University of Geneva; Manos	
Tsakiris –	The Warburg Institute, University of London
There is a growing consensus that the continuous dynamic cortical representation of internal bodily states shape the
subjective experience of emotions. However, the specific contribution of physiological afferent mechanisms to
emotional processing is typically overlooked by research. Recent experimental approaches capitalize on the phasic
properties of baroreceptor firing, i.e. active during cardiac systole and quiescent during cardiac diastole, to study how
afferent autonomic signals modulate the processing of sensory information. In particular, it has been shown that
baroreceptor activation enhances the processing of threat-signalling stimuli. Here, we aimed to look further into the
mechanisms underlying the cardiac cycle enhancement of fear processing by investigating its impact in attentional
capture processes. In an adapted version of the emotional dot-probe paradigm, we timed the presentation of cues,
either fearful or neutral faces, to coincide with the different phases of the cardiac cycle. Capitalizing on the fact that
distinct neural pathways are selectively sensitive to different ranges of spatial frequency information, we presented
cues with different spatial ranges. Results revealed a selective enhancement of attentional engagement to low spatial
frequency fearful faces presented during cardiac systole relative to diastole. No cardiac cycle effects were observed
to high spatial frequency nor broad spatial frequency cues. These findings further our understanding of how bodybrain interactions may impact the visual processing of fearful stimuli and contribute to the increased attentional
capture of threat signals.
A – 11
PREFRONTAL CORTICAL ACTIVITY DURING THE STROOP TASK: NEW INSIGHTS INTO THE WHY AND
THE WHO OF REAL-WORLD RISKY SEXUAL BEHAVIOR
Emily Barkley-Levenson	–	Hofstra University; Feng Xue	– University of Southern California; Vita Droutman	– University
of Southern California; Lynn C. Miller	– University of Southern California; Benjamin J. Smith	– University of Southern
California; David C. Jeong	– University of Southern California; Zhong-Lin Lu	– The Ohio State University; Antoine
Bechara	– University of Southern California; Stephen J. Read	– University of Southern California 	
Research suggests that deficits in both executive functioning and trait impulsivity may play a role in risky sexual
behavior. At the neural level, dysregulation of the prefrontal cortex has been linked to impulsivity, measured

	34

neurocognitively and through self-report. However, the relationship between neurocognitive measures of executive
control and trait impulsivity in jointly predicting risky sexual behavior has not been investigated. This study
investigated the relationship between neural functioning during the Stroop task (a common measure of cognitive
control) and risky sexual behavior as well as the effect of individual differences in urgent (positive and negative)
impulsivity on this relationship. We analyzed data for 90 sexually active men who have sex with men (MSM) who selfreported their risky sexual behavior (instances of condomless anal intercourse in the last 90 days), completed the
Stroop task during fMRI scanning, and completed the UPPS-P impulsivity inventory. Risky participants displayed
greater activation than safe participants during the color congruent condition of the Stroop task in ACC/DMPFC,
DLPFC, left frontal pole, and right insula. Across these regions, this neural activation mediated the link between
(positive and/or negative) urgent impulsivity and risky sexual behavior. One interpretation of these findings suggests
that the brains of men who engage in risky sexual behavior may be less adept at distributing cognitive resources
efficiently during tasks of response inhibition and cognitive control than men who practice safe sex, and that this may
be due to dysregulation of the prefrontal cortical/fronto-insular system implicated in impulse control.
A – 12
TESTING MONKEYS' PREFERENCE FOR SOCIAL STIMULI USING AN IN-CAGE TOUCH SCREEN TASK
Naz Belkaya – University of Pennsylvania; Michael L. Platt – University of Pennsylvania
The purpose of this research is to identify relevant variables in a simple touch screen task to reveal or predict the
salience of the distracting picture to the subject. Primates were engaged in a task where they had to touch a black
dot wherever and whenever it appeared on a touch screen mounted to their cages. Pictures of familiar monkey faces,
unfamiliar monkey faces, monkeys averting gaze, monkeys with threatening expressions, and perineal swellings were
used as distractor images and the resulting behavior analyzed for differences in the value these images had for each
subject monkey. We predicted that behavior would vary depending on the category of the picture and its
reproductive quality.
A – 13
PREDICTIVE CODING IN ACTION OBSERVATION: P600 AS A MARKER OF PREDICTION ERROR
Chiara Bozzacchi – Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience; Valeria Gazzola – Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience;
Christian Keysers – Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience
Observing other people acting rarely generates surprise. Some features important to this predictability are (a) object
affordances and (b) our prior experience with a specific actor. Here we investigate how predictions generated by
these two factors influence the way our brain processes observed actions. In a 64-channels EEG experiment, we
presented participants with pictures of objects initially strongly associated with the hand (e.g. teapot) or with the foot
(e.g. pump). Participants were asked to predict on each trial whether the actor will act upon the object with the hand
or foot. After reporting their prediction, a movie revealed the actor’s action. 75% of trials showed an action using the
effector incongruent with the object (e.g. pushing the teapot with the foot). Participants updated their expectations,
eventually predicting the incongruent effector in ~50% of trials. ERPs revealed that trials in which participants saw
actions that were at odds with the affordance of the object and/or with their trial-by-trial predictions, were
characterized by an increased late component (P600). Predictive coding theories posit that occipito-temporal and
parietal cortices should show augmented responses when observed actions violate (motor) predictions. In line with
these theories, source localization analysis reports this P600 component to indeed originate from the Middle
Temporal Gyrus and Inferior Parietal Lobule. In conclusion, affordances and prior knowledge of an actor both
influence how we process observed actions and our data suggest the P600 as a marker of prediction error for action
observation.
A – 14
THE NEURAL BASIS OF SOCIAL COGNITION: EXPLORING FALSE-BELIEF PROCESSING ACROSS THE
LIFESPAN USING EEG MEASURES
Elisabeth E.F. Bradford – University of Kent; Victoria E.A. Brunsdon – University of Kent; Heather Ferguson –
University of Kent
Theory of Mind (ToM), or social cognition, refers to the ability to understand, compute, and attribute mental states.
Previous research has shown that even in healthy ageing, declines in social-cognitive abilities are often seen. The
research presented here recruited younger (18-35 years-old) and older (60+ years-old) healthy adults to explore the
neural basis of changes in social-cognition across the lifespan. Using EEG measures, we investigated the neural
responses of older and younger participants when listening to stories involving true- or false-belief scenarios. In the
stories, a character was described as having a true- or false-belief about an object’s location, before acting in a
manner consistent or inconsistent with this ascribed belief-state. Participants also completed questionnaires
(including the Autism Quotient and Empathy Quotient) to assess self-report measures of general social abilities, and
how these may predict individual differences in belief-state processing. Results revealed differences in how true- and

	

35

false-belief states were processed, with a significant role of belief-consistent versus belief-inconsistent outcomes;
when the story character possessed a false-belief, belief-consistent outcomes led to a more negative-going N400
component than belief-inconsistent outcomes. These distinctions were more pronounced in older adults than in
younger adults, suggesting a difference in how belief-states are processed at different ages.
A – 15
NEURAL PREDICTORS OF PERSUASION-INDUCED BEHAVIOR CHANGE, AS MEASURED WITH FNIRS
Shannon Burns – University of California, Los Angeles; Lianne Barnes – University of California, Los Angeles; Perri
Katzman – New York University; Matthew Lieberman – University of California, Los Angeles
Functional neuroimaging can probe the cognitive processes involved in persuasion without relying on fallible selfreports. Specifically, activity in the medial prefrontal cortex and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex as measured by
fMRI during persuasive message exposure can predict future behavior change more accurately than subjective
ratings of persuasiveness. The purpose of this study was to replicate these findings with fNIRS, a compact and
movement-robust neuroimaging modality, in order to check the validity of these previous results in more ecologically
valid contexts. Sixty-nine participants completed a behavioral survey of their weekly sunscreen use, read several
messages during a scanning session persuading them to use more sunscreen, and then completed another
behavioral survey one week later. Results from this study were comparable to previous fMRI work - medial and right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity during message exposure predicted sunscreen use one week later, and the
strength of the negative correlation between the two brain areas was a significant predictor of behavior change,
above and beyond reported behavioral intentions.
A – 16
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS MODERATES THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE
Christopher N. Cascio – University of Pennsylvania; Matthew Brook O'Donnell – University of Pennsylvania; Carolyn
Yoon – University of Michigan; Matthew D. Lieberman – University of California, Los Angeles; Emily B. Falk –
University of Pennsylvania
People routinely change their preferences and behaviors in response to social influence. Early development, however,
may change the way that the brain responds to social cues, and as such people from different cultural upbringings
may be influenced through different neurocognitive pathways. Consistent with this logic, one potential moderator of
brain-social influence relationships is socioeconomic status (SES). The current study aimed to extend the current
literature on social influence by examining whether SES moderated neural mechanisms associated conforming to
peer feedback when misaligned with peers in a sample of young adults from high and low SES backgrounds. Overall,
results from the current study demonstrated that although rates of conformity behavior were similar between high
and low SES participants, the underlying neural mechanisms associated with conformity were different. Specifically,
those from higher SES backgrounds show greater activity in DMPFC and VMPFC when conforming to peer feedback,
whereas those from lower SES backgrounds show greater activity in TPJ, IFG, and MFG when conforming to peer
feedback. Thus, those from high and low SES backgrounds recruit different neural processes when conforming to
peer feedback, despite the fact that their ultimate behaviors appear similar on the surface. These results suggest that
different backgrounds and environments (i.e., low versus high SES) may influence different learned approaches to
problem solving and more generally navigating the social world. In turn, this may suggest that different intervention
strategies would be useful for similar behaviors among those from different backgrounds and environments.
A – 17
PUBERTY: ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN TIMING, TEMPO, FUNCTION, & STRUCTURE OF THE BRAIN
Rajpreet Chahal – University of California, Davis; Veronika Vilgis – University of California, Davis; Kate Keenan –
University of Chicago; Erika Forbes – University of Pittsburgh; Allison Hipwell – University of Pittsburgh
Pubertal timing appears to play a critical role in shaping adolescent development (e.g., Keenan et al., 2014).
Evidence suggests that pubertal hormones may influence structural brain development, though no research has
investigated how timing and tempo may reflect differences in neural organization, such as white matter (WM) tract
myelination. Myelination is reflected by increasing fractional anisotropy (FA) and decreasing mean diffusivity (MD)
and radial diffusivity (RD) of water molecules (Hasan, 2007). We examined the relationship between girls’
longitudinal pubertal maturation at early ages and WM architecture in early adulthood. In a subsample of 115 girls
from the Pittsburgh Girls Study, pubertal status was assessed with the Petersen Physical Development Scale (PDS;
Petersen, 1988) at ages 9-15, and FA, MD, & RD values were derived using a diffusion-tensor imaging (DTI) scan at
age 19. Tract-based spatial statistics were used to analyze the association between pubertal intercepts (timing) and
slopes (tempo) and WM integrity. Results indicated that girls further in pubertal maturation at age 9 showed
significantly higher FA at age 19 in the inferior fronto-occipital (IFOF), uncinate (UF), superior longitudinal (SLF), and
inferior longitudinal (ILF) fasciculi, and anterior thalamic radiation (ATR) (t (114)=3.32-5.08, p < .05). Further, faster
pubertal progression at ages 9, 10, and 11 was associated with decreased MD in the IFOF, UF, ILF, SLF, and

	36

corticospinal tract (t (114)=2.48-5, p < .05). These findings are among the first to show that pubertal timing &
tempo may be associated with neural transmission later on in development across brain regions.
A – 18
INCREASED SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE OF NON-TARGET EMOTIONS AND NEUROANATOMICAL
CORRELATES IN PATIENTS WITH FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
Kuan-Hua Chen – University of California, Berkeley; Alice Y. Hua – University of California, Berkeley; Sandy J. Lwi –
University of California, Berkeley; Claudia M. Haase – Northwestern University; Howard J. Rosen – University of
California, San Francisco; Bruce L. Miller – University of California, San Francisco; Robert W. Levenson – University of
California, Berkeley
Experiencing non-target emotions in contexts that predominantly elicit one particular emotion may reflect alterations
to emotion processing. We examined subjective experience of non-target emotions – emotions that the stimuli were
not designed or selected to induce – in patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD; n = 99), Alzheimer’s disease
(AD; n = 45), other neurodegenerative diseases (n = 45) and healthy controls (n = 37). Participants watched three
film clips intended to elicit amusement, sadness, and disgust. Self-report of nine non-target emotions (e.g., anger)
was analyzed. We found that patients with FTD reported more positive and negative non-target emotions, whereas
patients with AD reported more positive non-target emotions when compared to normal controls and patients with
other neurodegenerative diseases (ps < .001). The findings were limited to self-reported emotion as facial
expressions of non-target emotions did not differ between groups. Examining neuroanatomical correlates of this
effect using whole-brain VBM analyses revealed that greater experience of negative non-target emotions was
associated with greater atrophy in left hemisphere regions associated with self-awareness of emotion, including the
anterior insula and ventral striatum (pFWE < .05). Greater subjective experience of positive non-target emotions was
associated with greater atrophy in left hemisphere regions associated with processing social contextual information,
including the middle temporal and inferior temporal gyri (p < .001). These results suggest disease-related changes in
subjective experience of non-target emotions in FTD and AD, which may be linked to atrophy in brain structures
underlying self-awareness of emotion and social contextual processing.
A – 19
THE IMPACT OF EMOTIONAL CUES ON SHORT-TERM AND LONG-TERM MEMORY DURING
ADOLESCENCE
Alexandra O. Cohen – Weill Cornell Medical College; May I. Conley – Yale University; Tariq Cannonier – Yale
University; Makana D. Williams – Yale University; Danielle V. Dellarco – University of Miami; B.J. Casey – Yale
University
Emotional information pervades daily life and can influence memory, which affects learning and performance of
everyday cognitive tasks. Adolescence is a time of heightened sensitivity to emotional and social inputs, as dynamic
changes in brain structure and function take place. In adults, emotional information typically enhances subsequent
memory, via consolidation mechanisms involving the amygdala (Beyler et al., 2016); however, the impact of
emotional and social content on memory across development, as neural circuitries continues to mature (Casey et al.,
2016), remains unclear. The present study implements an emotional n-back task using happy, fearful, and calm faces
as well as places in individuals ages 9 to 29. Participants are tested for their subsequent memory of the stimuli used
in the task either immediately after completing the task or 24 hours later, to allow for memory consolidation. A mixed
model building approach is used to characterize age-related trajectories in recognition memory, where we test for
linear, quadratic, and cubic effects of mean-centered age (Braams et al., 2015). Adolescents show better memory for
places than faces in the immediate recall condition. After 24 hours, we observe the emergence of non-linear agerelated changes in corrected recognition memory (correct hits minus incorrect false alarms) for emotional cues.
These preliminary results suggest that emotional and social information differentially influence short-term and longterm memory capacity across development.
A – 20
THE ENDOCRINOLOGY OF PAIN SENSITIVITY IN RESPONSE TO SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE AND REJECTION
Lindsay B. Cooper – Simon Fraser University; Neil V. Watson – Simon Fraser University
The common neural underpinnings of physical and social pain have recently been used to explain the relationship
between emotional distress and fluctuations in pain sensitivity. However, the neuroendocrine correlates of these
states are relatively unknown, as are any gender differences that might arise in response to an episode of social
rejection or acceptance. In as much as social rejection is experienced as stressful, cortisol might be expected to
increase in response to these kinds of interactions. Testosterone, often found to act in conjunction with cortisol to
influence social behavior, may also be affected. Furthermore, the extent to which testosterone and cortisol are
reactive to experiences of social exclusion and inclusion may play a role in determining pain sensitivity after these
sorts of interactions. In pursuit of these questions, 2-3 mL of saliva was collected before and after a social

	

37

manipulation designed to make participants feel either accepted or rejected. The enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) method was used to determine hormonal fluctuations in response to this social manipulation.
Significant gender differences were found in pain sensitivity after being socially accepted, with males displaying
greater pain threshold and tolerance than females. These differences were not found after being rejected. Males but
not females, had higher testosterone concentrations after being socially accepted than after being rejected, a change
that was not found in cortisol. Finally, the extent to which fluctuations in testosterone and cortisol are predictive of
pain sensitivity, as well as the evolutionary implications of this relationship, will also be discussed.
A – 21
NEURAL SYSTEMS UNDERLYING YOUTH IRRITABILITY: INVESTIGATING DISRUPTED EMOTIONAL
RESPONSIVENESS AS A RISK FACTOR
Kathleen I. Crum – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Karina S. Blair – Boys Town National Research Hospital &
University of Nebraska Medical Center; Joseph Aloi – Boys Town National Research Hospital & University of Nebraska
Medical Center; Harma Meffert – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Stuart White – Boys Town National
Research Hospital; Patrick M. Taylor – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Abraham Killanin – Boys Town
National Research Hospital; Kathryn O. Adams – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Kayla H. Pope – Boys Town
National Research Hospital & Creighton University; James R. Blair – Boys Town National Research Hospital &
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Increased levels of irritability are a feature of a number of developmental disorders, and are associated with
considerable impairment and poor long-term prognoses. Indeed, research has linked irritability to affective, anxiety,
and behavior disorders, as well as adverse educational, occupational, and mental health outcomes into adulthood.
Overall, the literature suggests that irritability represents a potential marker of underlying dysregulation related to
psychopathology. However, an understanding of the neural systems that result, when compromised, in increased
irritability remains in its infancy. It could be suggested that increased irritability might be related to increased threat
responsiveness and/or deficient emotional regulation. To test this hypothesis, youth in a residential care facility and
the surrounding community (N=122) performed the affective Stroop task during fMRI. This task allows both
responsiveness to threat and positive emotional distracters to be indexed, and the functional integrity of systems
engaged in top down attentional control that can automatically reduce emotional responsiveness. Results indicated
that level of irritability, as indexed by the Affective Reactivity Index, was not related to the functional integrity of
regions implicated in top down attentional control. However, increased levels of irritability were associated with
disrupted responding within both the left amygdala and extensive regions of rostral medial frontal cortex, particularly
on task trials involving threatening distracters. In conclusion, these data suggest that increased emotional
responsiveness, irrespective of top down attention emotional regulation integrity, is a risk factor for increased levels
of irritability.
A – 22
THE IMPACT OF UNCERTAIN THREAT ON AFFECTIVE BIAS: INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN RESPONSE
TO AMBIGUITY
F. Caroline Davis – US Army Natick Soldier Research, Development & Engineering Center; Julie Cantelon – Tufts
University; Zachary Haga – Tufts University; Caroline Mahoney – US Army Natick Soldier Research, Development &
Engineering Center; Holly Taylor – Tufts University; Maital Neta – University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Individuals who operate under highly stressful conditions (e.g., military personnel and first responders) are often
faced with the challenge of quickly interpreting ambiguous information in uncertain and potentially threatening
environments. When faced with ambiguity, it is likely adaptive to view potentially dangerous stimuli as threatening
until contextual information proves otherwise. One laboratory-based paradigm that can be used to simulate uncertain
threat is known as threat-of-shock (TOS), where participants are told that they might receive mild but unpredictable
electric shocks while performing an unrelated task. The uncertainty associated with this potential threat induces a
state of emotional arousal that is not overwhelmingly stressful, but has widespread – both adaptive and maladaptive
– effects on cognitive and affective function. For example, TOS is thought to enhance aversive processing and
abolish positivity bias. Importantly, in certain situations (e.g., when walking home alone at night), this anxiety can
promote an adaptive state of improved vigilance and defense mobilization. In the present study, we used TOS to
examine the effects of uncertain threat on valence bias, or the tendency to interpret ambiguous social cues as
positive or negative. As predicted, we found that heightened emotional arousal elicited by TOS was associated with
an increased tendency to interpret ambiguous cues negatively. Such negative interpretations are likely adaptive in
situations where threat-detection is critical for survival, and should override an individual’s tendency to interpret
ambiguity positively in safe contexts.

	38

A – 23
HELPING US VS. THEM: NEURAL CORRELATES OF COSTLY HELPING TO INGROUPS AND OUTGROUPS
IN YOUTH
Kathy T. Do – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Eva H. Telzer – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Intergroup biases can impact who individuals choose to help, resulting in a greater bias toward helping ingroups over
outgroups. Brain networks involved in empathy, social cognition, and affective processing underlie intergroup helping
behaviors in adults. However, little is known about the brain mechanisms of intergroup helping among youth, which
could help reduce biases before they escalate in adulthood. We examined the neural mechanisms underlying
prosocial decisions to ingroups and outgroups in a sample of children and adolescents (N=51, 8-16 years). Youth
were assigned to a novel ingroup team and introduced to members of their team and an outgroup team. During an
fMRI scan, participants made decisions to (1) keep or share points with ingroup or outgroup peers at a cost to
themselves (costly donations; cost of sharing ranged from 1-5 points) and (2) keep points when there was no cost to
themselves or benefit to another (pure reward). Across age, participants made costly donations to help ingroups
significantly more than outgroups. However, there was an Age x Points (i.e., cost of sharing) interaction: while
younger children did not discriminate between point values when making costly donations to ingroups versus
outgroups, older adolescents showed greater ingroup loyalty when making donations with higher personal costs (3-5
points). Interestingly, youth who exhibited greater insula, pSTS, and amygdala activity to outgroups showed less bias
in their decisions to help outgroups. These results suggest that neural regions involved in social and affective
processing may moderate the effect of intergroup biases on helping in youth.
A – 24
NEURAL CORRELATES OF DYSFUNCTIONAL FACIAL EMOTION PROCESSING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: AN
UPDATED META-ANALYSIS WITH META-REGRESSION
Debo Dong – Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of Ministry of Education, High-Field Magnetic Resonance Brain
Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Center for Information in Medicine, School of Life Science and
Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China; Yulin Wang – Vrije Universiteit & University of
Gent; Xuebin Chang – Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of Ministry of Education, High-Field Magnetic Resonance
Brain Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Center for Information in Medicine, School of Life Science and
Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China; Cheng Luo Key – Laboratory for
NeuroInformation of Ministry of Education, High-Field Magnetic Resonance Brain Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan
Province, Center for Information in Medicine, School of Life Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China; Dezhong Yao – Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of Ministry of Education, High-Field
Magnetic Resonance Brain Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Center for Information in Medicine, School of
Life Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Impairment of facial emotion perception is a core feature in schizophrenia. Despite an increasing number of
published functional neuroimaging studies related to this issue, the neural mechanism of impaired facial perception
still remains unclear, not to mention the heterogeneity in previous published findings. To further elucidate neural
underpinnings of this deficit, we conducted an update whole brain meta-analysis to identify the consistent and
reliable abnormalities of neural patterns in schizophrenia using seed-based d mapping. Importantly, voxel wise metaregression analyses were conducted to examine the influences of demographic (age, gender) and clinical variables
(severity of symptoms, medication) on observed findings. Through a comprehensive literature search, 31 studies
were included in the present meta-analysis based on our inclusion criterial. During facial emotion perception, we
reliably found schizophrenia patients recruited less activation in visual cortex, including fusiform gyrus, calcarine
fissure and inferior occipital gyrus; also less activation in subcortical structures, including amygdala, superior
temporal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus, insula, para-/hippocampus, thalamus, cerebellum, which are brain regions
ranging across dorsal and ventral emotion systems. Importantly, the observed neural abnormalities from our dataanalysis in facial emotion perception were influenced by age, gender, scores of psychiatric symptoms and the dosage
of chlorpromazine equivalent. Our results highlighted a marked under-recruitment of the dorsal and ventral limbic
emotion systems may underlie the impairment of facial emotion perception in Schizophrenia and future studies
exploring the interacting between these two emotional sub-units should take the effect of age, gender, severity of
symptoms, and dosage of medication into account.
A – 25
POSITIVE VALENCE BIAS IN RESPONSE TO AMBIGUOUS FACIAL EXPRESSIONS IS ASSOCIATED WITH
EMOTION REGULATION ABILITY
Christopher R. Doxey – University of Nebraska–Lincoln; Tien T. Tong – University of Nebraska–Lincoln; Daniel J.
Henley – University of Nebraska–Lincoln; Maital Neta University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Recent studies have examined individual differences in response to ambiguous facial expressions. In particular,
although some expressions are consistently rated as positive (happy) or negative (angry), surprised expressions are

	

39

rated as positive by some and negative by others. This difference in ratings is one’s valence bias. We have previously
shown that the negative response to surprised faces is more automatic, and we have hypothesized that positive
ratings require more regulation. Here, we tested this hypothesis by examining individual differences in valence bias in
context of an explicit emotion regulation task. Participants rated surprised, angry, and happy expressions, and were
divided into groups (those with a positive or negative bias) based on a median split of ratings of surprise. In the MRI,
participants passively viewed surprised faces, and performed a separate regulation task, in which they viewed
negative scenes and were asked, during some blocks, to maintain their natural response and, during other blocks, to
reinterpret the images as less negative. The difference in negative ratings (maintain – reinterpret) was used as
emotional regulation score for each participant. We found a significant positive correlation between vmPFC and
amygdala during surprise, but only for individuals with a positive valence bias. Further, a region of vlPFC, which
showed reinterpret > maintain activity, also showed greater activity during surprise in individuals with positive >
negative bias, and this activity was positively correlated with emotional regulation score. Taken together, this
suggests that a more positive valence bias is associated with greater explicit emotion regulation.
A – 26
INTRANASAL OXYTOCIN AFFECTS PERCEPTIONS OF FACIAL TRUSTWORTHINESS IN YOUNG AND
OLDER ADULTS
Natalie Ebner – University of Florida; Tian Lin – University of Florida; Marilyn Horta – University of Florida; Adam
Woods – University of Florida; Ronald Cohen – University of Florida; David Feifel – University of California, San
Diego; Håkan Fischer – University of Stockholm
Perceptions of trustworthiness in others influence social decisions and impact the course of social interactions.
Growing evidence suggests that intranasal administration of the neuropeptide oxytocin increases perceived
trustworthiness of unfamiliar faces. To date, prosocial effects of oxytocin have been mostly investigated in young
male individuals and effects in aging are largely unknown. Recent evidence that older adults experience decreased
sensitivity to cues of trustworthiness highlights the importance of examining potential benefits of intranasal oxytocin
administration on perceptions of facial trustworthiness in older adults. Adopting a developmental, brain−behavior
analytic approach, in the present fMRI study, 48 young and 50 older women and men evaluated the trustworthiness
of young and older male and female unfamiliar faces, intermixed with scrambled images. Participants were randomly
assigned to either self-administer 24 IUs intranasal oxytocin or a placebo about 50 minutes before engagement in
the task. Oxytocin compared to placebo administration resulted in increased activity in midline structures (e.g.,
medial prefrontal cortex, anterior and posterior cingulate) and face processing regions (e.g., insula, fusiform gyrus)
to cues of facial trustworthiness, while there was no treatment effect for scrambled images. Age-differential analysis
suggested a posterior-to-anterior shift in brain activity with age following OT administration. Findings from this study
provide further evidence for a role of oxytocin in perceptions of facial trustworthiness. Results will be discussed in the
context of an emerging literature on oxytocin’s age-modulatory role in social cognition, prosociality, and affective
processing.
A – 27
SIMULTANEOUS FMRI TO INVESTIGATE THE BRAIN BASIS OF THE PATIENT-CLINICIAN
RELATIONSHIP IN PAIN TREATMENT
Dan-Mikael Ellingsen – Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Changjin Jung – Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Jeungchan Lee – Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School;
Kylie Isenburg – Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Jessica Gerber – Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Ishtiaq Mawla – Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Roberta
Sclocco – Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Robert Edwards – Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School; John Kelley – Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Irving
Kirsch – Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School
The patient-clinician relationship can modulate symptoms such as pain, but the brain basis for this is unknown. Here,
we simultaneously record fMRI in patients and clinicians (hyperscanning), who interact via video transfer, during
clinician-initiated treatment of the patient’s pain. We hypothesized concordant activation of circuitry involved in social
mirroring, such as ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex (vlPFC) and anterior Insula (aINS) in both patients and clinicians
during pain treatment. Eight healthy volunteers participated in this pilot experiment. Each participant was matched
with another participant, and assumed roles of ‘patient’ and ‘clinician’ (4 ‘dyads’). The patient received a number of
moderately painful cuff pressures to the left leg (15 s), while the clinician used a button box to control (real or sham)
electroacupuncture stimulation to the patient’s leg to treat the cuff pain. Using MRI-compatible cameras, the
participants were enabled to communicate non-verbally throughout the scan. fMRI preprocessing included motion
correction, skull stripping, and registration to MNI152. After single-subject GLM analysis, we conducted a group GLM
(whole-brain cluster-correction for multiple comparisons) followed by a group conjunction analysis, between patients
and clinicians, of the pain+treatment>rest contrast. Patients (receiving pain+treatment) showed activation of insula,

	40

primary and secondary somatosensory areas, vlPFC and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). Clinicians (observing
pain+treating) showed activation in anterior insula, S1, S2, vlPFC, and primary and secondary visual areas. A
conjunction analysis indicated concordant activation of vlPFC and anterior insula for both patients and clinicians.
Building on this pilot setup, we plan to enroll chronic pain patients and acupuncturists as subjects.
A – 28
HIERARCHICAL BRAIN REPRESENTATIONS OF NATURALISTIC “SOCIAL CONGRUENCY” MENTALIZING
Felipe Fernandes Pegado – University of Leuven
In real-life we interact with the world in a multisensory way. Nevertheless, research in cognitive neuroscience
typically focuses on one separate sensory system. Further, complex natural tasks (e.g., mentalizing) engage not only
a single system (e.g., visual) but instead several neural systems. We developed a naturalisitic multisensory
mentalizing task for social perception, by asking participants “what do you think most of people would answer” when
judging the congruency between vocal emotional responses to visual scenes having emotional content. For example,
trials with negative-valence scenes coupled with negative-valence vocalizations were typically judged congruent,
whereas with positive vocalizations in this case were assigned as incongruent. We thus avoided the ‘logical reasoning’
approach of the classical false-believe tasks. Here instead a “thin-slice perception” of social appropriateness was used
to target mentalizing ‘at a glance’. The first results revealed: 1) low-level visual areas only cares about low-level
visual features, even in this naturalisitic complex context. Interestingly, comparisons with V1 models revealed that
‘real-life’ models (from independent V1 data) outperformed theoretical ones, e.g., HMAX, deep learning (last layer).
2) Surprisingly, high-level visual areas spontaneously and strongly discriminate animate versus inanimate images,
which was task-irrelevant. 3) Crucially, cross-modal valence congruency (i.e., social congruency) could be
discriminated in medial prefrontal cortex and precuneus, confirming their roles for metalizing beyond logical
reasoning. Finally, new acquiring data from autism population will shed new light in the controversial topic: at which
level of the brain hierarchy their neural representations differ: at sensory level or only at high-level social cognition?
A – 29
OVERLAPPING AND DISTINCT NEURAL CORRELATES OF IMITATING AND OPPOSING FACIAL
MOVEMENTS
Detre A. Godinez – University of Denver; Daniel S. Lumian – University of Denver; Tanisha Crosby-Attipoe –
University of Denver; Ana M. Bedacarratz – University of Denver; Paree Zarolia – University of Denver; Kateri McRae
– University of Denver
This study explored overlapping and distinct neural processes associated with two of our most commonly
experienced social behaviors – imitation and opposition of facial expressions. Utilizing a novel, flexible goal-oriented
task with 40 participants, imitation and opposition of facial expressions recruited overlapping activation in frontal
parietal regions, as well as premotor, superior temporal and anterior intraparietal regions. Opposing compared to
imitating more strongly engaged the superior frontal gyrus, superior temporal sulcus, and the anterior intraparietal
sulcus for both emotional and averted eye gaze photos. Stimulus type and instruction interacted such that greater
activation was observed in the dorsal anterior cingulate for oppose compared to imitate for the eye gaze condition,
with no differences for the emotional expression condition. In contrast for emotional expressions, opposing recruited
the frontal pole and cuneus greater than imitating. Overlapping activation when imitating and opposing as well as
increased activation for opposing, suggested that despite having very different goals, imitating and opposing may
recruit similar neural networks previously associated with mirroring and goal maintenance. However, the increased
conflict associated with opposing appears to drive differences in cingulate and frontal regions based on what type of
movement is being opposed (eye gaze or emotional expression).
A – 30
ADOLESCENTS’ EMPATHIC REACTIONS TO ABSTRACT SOCIAL STORIES ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
NEURAL CONNECTIVITY AT REST, AND PREDICT SUBSEQUENT LONG-TERM MEMORY FOR STORIES
Rebecca JM Gotlieb – University of Southern California; Xiao-Fei Yang – University of Southern California; Hima
Rajana – University of Southern California; Danielle Cremat – University of Southern California; Mary Helen
Immordino-Yang – University of Southern California
Empathizing involves imagining others’ internal cognitive or affective states. Empathizing is more complex in the
context of abstract, values-oriented social situations rather than concrete social circumstances. We hypothesized that
adolescents’ proclivities toward empathizing would be associated with resting connectivity in the default mode
network (DMN), as the DMN is known to support imagination and feeling abstract social emotions. Since the DMN is
also involved in remembering, we further hypothesized that empathizing would promote long-term memory. As such,
we asked 53 adolescents (mean age 15.99 years; 27 female) to describe their feelings to 10 abstract and 10 concrete
social stories in an interview. Resting-state DMN connectivity was identified using independent component analysis
from a 7-minute resting state scan. Two years later participants reported their memories for the stories. For abstract

	

41

social stories, controlling for age and verbal IQ, the extent to which adolescents expressed empathy was associated
with DMN connectivity to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and with DMN connectivity to the right anterior insula
(thresholded at p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons). Empathy also predicted memory for the stories two
years later F(1, 47)= 6.40, P=0.02. No such relationships were found for concrete social stories. Thus, adolescents
may vary in neural and psychological readiness to deeply empathize, and greater ability to empathize may facilitate
memory. Preliminary analyses suggest DMN connectivity may mediate the relationship between empathy for abstract
stories and memory—a hypothesis our future research will investigate. Overall, current findings support educators’
beliefs that social-emotional engagement facilitates learning.
A – 31
CHALLENGING THE RACE CONCEPT DECREASES BRAIN RESPONSES TO RACE
Shihui Han – Peking University; Na Du – Peking University
Race is a major social category of humans on the basis of external attributes such as skin tone and facial/body
shapes, which strongly influences our emotion, attitude and behavior toward others. Brain imaging studies have
shown increasing findings of brain activities that discriminate between same-race and other-face individuals,
suggesting the presence of embedded neural coding of race in the human brain. However, it has been argued that
race is a sociocultural construction obtained during development and this assertion allows us to predict that
challenging the concept of race is able to reduce the differential neural responses to same-race and other-race
individuals. We tested this hypothesis by asking Chinese healthy adults to read priming essays that challenge the
concept of human race. After the priming procedure event-related brain potentials to Asian and Caucasian faces were
recorded and implicit attitudes toward same-face and other-race faces were assessed using the Implicit Attitude Test.
We found that, relative to participants who read essays about animal subspecies, participants whose human race
concept was challenged tended to show decreased implicit positive attitudes toward same-race (vs. other-race)
faces. Moreover, challenging the concept of race significantly decreased neural responses over the frontal (N1/P2)
and lateral occipital (N170) regions that discriminated same-race and other-race faces in the control participants. Our
findings indicate that, rather than being intrinsically rooted in the human brain, neural coding of race is flexible and
can be altered by social influences.
A – 32
ATYPICAL BODILY MAPS OF EMOTIONS IN AUTISM
Laura Harrison – University of Southern California; Lynn Paul – California Institute of Technology; Lauri Nummenmaa
– University of Turku; Ralph Adolphs – California Institute of Technology
People consistently report specific bodily sensations associated with different emotions – for example, a weakening of
the limbs and growing heaviness in the chest during sadness, revealed through self-report emotional body maps
drawn on a computer (Nummenmaa, et al., PNAS, 2014). These maps are consistent with the hypothesis that
interpretation of bodily sensations gives rise to emotional experience, motivating the prediction that people who have
difficulties judging their own bodily states, such as those with alexithymia or autism, might also be impaired in
reporting where emotions are expressed in the body. We collected emotional body maps; empathy scores
(Interpersonal Reactivity Index, IRI); and alexithymia scores (Toronto Alexithymia Scale, TAS) in 15 adults with ASD
and 15 matched controls. In our analyses, we (1) tested for group differences in alexithymia and empathy scores; (2)
compared the richness (total number of colored pixels) and typicality (relative to Nummenmaa’s (2014) original
normative sample of 302 subjects) of emotional body maps across groups; and (3) correlated these metrics with
individuals’ TAS and IRI scores. Results showed that (1) TAS-total scores were higher (d =1.37) and IRI-empathic
concern scores were lower (d=1.06) in the ASD group; (2) ASD subjects colored fewer pixels in the torso (d=0.82)
across basic emotions and had less typical body maps (d=0.73); and (3) across individuals, typicality positively
correlated (rho=0.50) with IRI-fantasy scores. Surprisingly, TAS-total scores positively correlated (rho=0.51) with
typicality in the ASD group. Future work will explore differences in the focus (action vs. feeling) of verbal reports of
emotion.
A – 33
EFFECTS OF AGE AND OXYTOCIN ON FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF FUSIFORM CORTEX DURING
DYNAMIC EMOTION IDENTIFICATION
Marilyn Horta – University of Florida; Tian Lin – University of Florida; Maryam Ziaei – University of Queensland; Adam
Soliman – University of Florida; Eric S. Porges – University of Florida; David Feifel – University of California, San
Diego; Daniela Oliveira – University of Florida; Håkan Fischer – Stockholm University; Ronald A. Cohen – University of
Florida; Natalie C. Ebner – University of Florida
Accurately reading the emotions of others is a crucial skill for maintaining healthy relationships across the lifespan.
However, aging is associated with increased difficulty in emotion identification. The underlying neural mechanisms of
this effect are largely unknown but could be associated with age-related change in network communication for face

	42

processing, namely within the fusiform cortex (FC). Growing evidence also suggests that oxytocin may modulate the
ability to identify facial emotions, though understudied in aging. Forty-seven young and 50 older participants
administered intranasal oxytocin (24 IU) or placebo in a between-subject, randomized, double-blind procedure prior
to engaging in a fMRI task in which participants viewed neutral faces that morphed into emotional expressions
(happy, sad, angry, fearful). Participants indicated which emotion was displayed. Older compared to young
participants were slower and less accurate in identifying these dynamic emotions. These effects were pronounced for
negative emotions, but did not vary by treatment. Functional connectivity analyses showed that older participants,
compared to young, had decreased connectivity of the FC with the hippocampus and amygdala across all emotions.
Additionally, participants in the oxytocin group, compared to the placebo group, showed decreased connectivity of
the FC with the cingulate gyrus for angry and fearful faces. Also, older participants in the oxytocin group, compared
to older participants in the placebo group, showed decreased connectivity of the FC and frontal pole for angry faces.
These findings suggest that age differences persist for dynamic emotion identification and that oxytocin affects FC
connectivity during processing of facial emotions across age.
A – 34
A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC RISK-TAKING SCALE FOR ADOLESCENTS (ADOLESCENT DOSPERT)
Brian Huh – Columbia University; Lilly Kofler – Columbia University; Bernd Figner – Radboud University; Anna van
Duijvenvoorde – Leiden University; Eveline Crone – Leiden University; Elke U. Weber – Princeton University
Risk-taking in adults is known to fluctuate across domains, as documented by the Domain Specific Risk-Taking
(DOSPERT) scale. However, much of the risk-taking literature lacks the psychometric tools necessary for assessing
risk preference and attitudes in developing populations. In this study, we aim to establish a version of the DOSPERT
scale for adolescents in order to understand risk behavior as well as elicit judgments of perceived riskiness and
expected benefits of the risky behaviors. Additionally, a measure of risk-taking for adolescents will allow
developmental researchers to track risky behaviors over the lifespan, using Adolescent DOSPERT for ages 12 to 21
and Adult DOSPERT for all ages thereafter. Using a sample of 488 participants, we find in a confirmatory factory
analysis that financial, recreational, and social domains load cleanly, while there is more overlap between the health
and safety and ethical domains. In addition, Chronbach’s alpha for the five subscales were between .69 and .88,
suggesting strong internal validity within predicted domains. Further, analysis of test-retest data shows high positive
correlations between risk-taking, risk perception, and expected benefit response scales across all domains,
suggesting high reliability and consistency. We also explore construct validity with outcome variables as sensation
seeking and alcohol consumption.
A – 35
PARASYMPATHETIC TONE, PTSD SYMPTOM PROFILES, AND PHASIC HEART RATE DURING THREAT
ANTICIPATION
Theodore P. Imhoff-Smith – University of Wisconsin-Madison; Dan W. Grupe – University of Wisconsin-Madison;
Richard J. Davidson – University of Wisconsin-Madison
Heart rate is a known physiological indicator of psychological health. While individual differences in heart rate
responses to affective stimuli have been thoroughly investigated, less is known about heart rate during threat
anticipation, particularly in relation to psychopathology. In this study, we examined phasic heart rate changes during
threat anticipation in relation to individual symptom profiles of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Fifty-seven
combat-exposed veterans with a spectrum of PTSD symptoms, as determined using the Clinician Administered PTSD
Scale, completed an instructed threat anticipation task with different cues indicating threat of mild electric shock
versus safety from shock. Functional MRI, respiration, and heart rate data were concurrently collected. We extracted
peak heart rate changes from baseline for three distinct epochs, identified from the group-averaged time course and
prior work (Bradley et al., 2001). We also assessed respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) during a separate resting
scan. Similar to previous research using visual stimuli, participants exhibited a characteristic triphasic heart rate
response during threat anticipation. Increased re-experiencing symptoms were associated with a faster acceleratory
response following threat cues (p < 0.05). Greater resting RSA was associated with a delay in this acceleratory
response (p < 0.1) and a stronger acceleratory response to threat (p = 0.01). Collectively, these data link the timing
and magnitude of heart rate acceleration with re-experiencing symptoms of PTSD and higher parasympathetic tone.
Findings suggest that phasic heart rate during threat anticipation may be an indicator of psychological health in
combat-exposed veterans, and provide a foundation for further study.
A – 36
EMOTIONAL CONFLICT ADAPTATION AND THE SEPARATION BETWEEN IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT
EMOTION REGULATION
Itamar Jalon – Tel Aviv University & Sourasky Medical Center; Alon Erdman – Sourasky Medical Center; Moran Artzi –
Sourasky Medical Center & Tel Aviv University; Jackob N. Keynan – Sourasky Medical Center & Tel Aviv University;

	

43

Avihay Cohen – Sourasky Medical Center; Rany Abend – Sourasky Medical Center & Tel Aviv University; Eiran V.
Harel – Beer Yaakov Mental Health Center; Talma Hendler – Sourasky Medical Center & Tel Aviv University
Deficient Emotion Regulation (ER) is associated with a broad range of psychopathologies, and is often divided into
implicit and explicit processes. Emotional conflict adaptation (ECA), an elementary process of ER, refers to the
tendency to engage top-down processes to anticipated emotional interference. ECA has been shown to involve
vmPFC activation and amygdala deactivation, and to be disrupted in depression and anxiety. Our goal was to
delineate this psychological process, and check whether it is a purely implicit process, by looking at connectivity
between regions often implicated in implicit and explicit ER and at trait alexithymia, the inability to perceive and
describe experienced emotion, which reflects a deficiency in explicit ER capacity. 45 participants completed an
emotional stroop task while undergoing fMRI. The task used can differentiate anticipated and non-anticipated
conflicts; ECA is inversely indexed by the difference in RT between such trials, with smaller values (high ECA)
reflecting greater implicit emotion regulation. RT was longer for non-anticipated vs. anticipated conflicts. Greater ECA
correlated with higher BOLD activation in vmPFC, and increased effective connectivity between vmPFC and vlPFC, a
typical explicit ER region. Low ECA was related with higher alexithymia in both the scanned group, and another
sample (N=120) completing the task outside the scanner. The results of this study demonstrate that ECA involved
activation in regions related to both implicit and explicit ER, suggesting that in the context of the stroop task, these
are not independent processes.
A – 37
FUNCTIONAL NETWORK AND SPATIOTEMPORAL DYNAMICS DURING REAPPRAISAL AND
SUPPRESSION: GRAPH THEORY AND DYNAMIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ANALYSIS
Suhnyoung Jun – Yonsei University; Seung-Koo Lee – Yonsei University; Sanghoon Han – Yonsei University
Reappraisal and suppression are two most commonly adopted emotion regulation strategies. This study examined (1)
the large-scale functional networks using graph theory-based approach to quantitate the topological characteristics of
networks and investigate the functional segregation and integration of network modules, and (2) dynamic functional
connectivity (FC) using sliding window correlation analysis to investigate temporally evolving spatial connectivity that
may occur over successive and overlapping short periods of a scan. Network analysis suggested that reappraisal has
the module that cognitively control the interpretation of the stimuli and regulate the emotional response. The
functional network of suppression suggested that suppression requires a module that inhibits emotional response and
monitors behavioral outcome of the emotional response (e.g., facial expression). For dynamic FC analysis, we
focused on two distinctive features: interregional FCs with prolonged stability which may build skeletal structure of
the dynamic network and those with inconstant fluctuation which work as modulators of the network. The dynamic
reappraisal network showed that intra-hemispheric prefrontal connections have the most stable connectivity
indicating dominant and constant role of cognitive control. The dynamic suppression network showed multiple
interhemispheric connections prominently between the subregions of cingulate gyrus, indicating the constant
awareness of one’s own facial expression for suppression. Our study not only help us understand the systematic
relations between the individual nodes during the use of specific emotion regulation strategy, but also propose a
novel way to interpret the meaning of interregional FCs that have distinct temporal features, i.e., prolonged stability
and inconstant fluctuation.
A – 38
IRRITABILITY AND AMYGDALA-VENTRAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX CONNECTIVITY IN CHILDREN WITH
HIGH FUNCTIONING AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER
Cindy Kiefer –San Diego State University; Maria Kryza-Lacombe – San Diego State University/University of California,
San Diego Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology; Katrina Cole – San Diego State University; Catherine Lord –
University of Michigan; Christopher S. Monk – University of Michigan; Jillian Lee Wiggins – San Diego State
University/University of California, San Diego Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology
Background: Irritability is a common, highly impairing symptom among youth with high functioning autism spectrum
disorder (HF-ASD) and predicts long-term adverse outcomes. Impaired processing of emotional faces, found in both
autism and irritability, may lead to inappropriate social responses. Indeed, amygdala hyperactivation elicited by
emotional faces has been found in autism and irritability in other diagnoses (i.e., bipolar disorder, disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder). Yet, little is known about the neural correlates of irritability in HF-ASD, nor how other brain
regions within amygdala networks may relate to irritability within HF-ASD. To characterize neural correlates of
irritability in HF-ASD, this study investigated amygdala functional connectivity. Methods: Children with HF-ASD
(N=33, aged 8-19 years) performed an implicit face emotion processing task during fMRI acquisition, in which
participants identified the gender of faces with happy, sad, fearful, and neutral expressions. Whole-brain amygdala
functional connectivity across emotions was calculated for each individual and correlated with an irritability-like
measure, the Aggressive Behavior subscale of the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL), which includes items (e.g.,
“temper tantrums or hot temper”) shown to comprise an irritability factor conceptualized as low threshold for anger.

	44

Results: Whole-brain analyses revealed alterations in right amygdala to ventral prefrontal cortex functional
connectivity, which correlated with the irritability-like subscale of the CBCL. Worse irritability-like symptoms related to
greater amygdala-prefrontal cortex connectivity (xyz=34,62,-2, t31=3.12, p<.05, k=80). Conclusions: Results
suggest that the neural substrates of irritability in HF-ASD include amygdala-prefrontal cortex dysfunction, providing
evidence that faces may elicit emotion dysregulation in autism, which may lead to irritability.
A – 39
VENTRAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX LESION IS ASSOCIATED WITH ABNORMAL APPRAISAL AND
REGULATION OF EVERYDAY EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE – AN EXPERIENCE SAMPLING STUDY
Joseph Kim – University of Utah; Laura Green – Vanderbilt University; Scott Perkins – Vanderbilt University; David
Zald – Vanderbilt University
Previous neuroimaging studies have suggested that the ventral prefrontal cortex (PFC) is involved in emotion
regulation. However, evidence demonstrating the ventral PFC’s direct influence on emotion regulation is lacking.
Furthermore, it is unclear whether the hypothesized role of the ventral PFC in emotion regulation generalizes to
naturalistic situations where uninstructed, spontaneous engagement of regulation is common. In the current study,
we attempted to address these gaps by utilizing the experience-sampling method in a sample of patients with focal
ventral PFC lesions. Specifically, we investigated whether the ventral PFC lesion sample (n=10) differed from controls
(n=10) in: (i) the magnitude of positive and negative affect experienced, (ii) the fluctuation of emotional experience
as measured by epoch to epoch change in affect magnitude, and (iii) the regulation strategy preference and
frequency, as well as perceived effectiveness of regulation. Study results indicated that individuals with damage to
the ventral PFC region experience decreased negative affect compared to controls but comparatively greater
fluctuation in epoch to epoch changes in negative affect. Moreover, while controls who endorse greater magnitude of
negative affect intensity also indicated greater utilization of a diverse set of regulation strategies, this was not the
case in individuals with ventral PFC damage, who showed only higher utilization of distraction as a regulatory
strategy. Findings from this study suggest that intact ventral PFC function plays a role in the maintenance of affect
stability as well as the adaptive utilization of strategies important in the voluntary control of affective experience.
A – 40
LONG-TERM MEDITATORS SHOW INCREASED RSFMRI FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN EMOTION
PROCESSING NETWORKS
Tammi RA Kral – University of Wisconsin-Madison; Jeanette A. Mumford – University of Wisconsin-Madison; Melissa
A. Rosenkranz – University of Wisconsin-Madison; Antoine Lutz – Lyon University; Richard J. Davidson – University of
Wisconsin-Madison
One of the primary goals of training in mindfulness meditation is to change the way we approach our emotions. Such
training can improve outcomes for individuals suffering from anxiety and depression, however the mechanisms
underlying these changes are largely unknown. We investigated the impact of long-term mindfulness (Vipassana)
meditation practice on resting-state functional connectivity (RS-fc) in networks related to emotion processing and
regulation. We compared amygdala and posterior cingulate (PC) RS-fc between 23 long-term meditators (LTMs) with
a lifetime of 3928 hours of practice on average (mean age(SD)= 49.9(11.5) years, 12 female) with 90 meditationnaïve participants (MNPs; mean age(SD)= 48.4(11.0) years, 58 female). The amygdala seed was defined
independently based on a localizer task involving viewing negative versus neutral pictures. We focused on the right
amygdala since LTMs and MNPs had differential amygdala activation to affective pictures specifically on the right. We
compared right amygdala RS-fc within dorsal lateral and ventral medial prefrontal cortex masks (DLPFC and VMPFC,
respectively) as these regions have been implicated in down-regulating amygdala activation. LTMs had greater
amygdala-DLPFC RS-fc than MNPs (p<0.05, corrected), however there was no group difference within the VMPFC.
Whole-brain analysis revealed that LTMs had greater right amygdala RS-fc with superior temporal sulcus and right
temporal parietal junction than MNPs (p<0.05, corrected). Finally, we examined PC-DLPFC connectivity, which was
reported to change with short-term mindfulness training and reflects interactions between executive control and
default mode networks. We found that LTMs had greater PC-DLPFC RS-sfc than MNPs (t(109)=-2.33, p=0.022),
providing a conceptual replication.
A – 41
REWARD AND PUNISHMENT MOTIVATION ARE ASSOCIATED WITH DISTINCT AND SHARED NEURAL
ACTIVATIONS WHEN MOTIVATING THE SAME BEHAVIOR
Jessica I. Lake – University of California, Los Angeles; Zachary P. Infantolino – Stony Brook University; Jeffrey M.
Spielberg – University of Delaware; Laura D. Crocker – Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System; Cindy, M. Yee
– University of California, Los Angeles; Wendy Heller – University of Illinois–Urbana; Gregory A. Miller – University of
California, Los Angeles
Motivational processes supporting the attainment of reward and avoidance of punishment typically have been studied

	

45

separately or have relied on paradigms in which reward and punishment motivate different, often opposing,
behaviors or choices. Yet possible rewards and punishments are often faced simultaneously and can motivate the
same behaviors. Preparation of different responses may confound neural representations of reward and punishment
motivation. Thus, this study sought to identify similarities and differences in how the brain responds to these
disparate motivational processes when they motivate the same behaviors. Participants completed a modified
monetary incentive delay task in which they were required to make a speeded button press after the presentation of
a target. Cues prior to the target indicated whether a monetary reward and/or a monetary loss could be expected if
the participant did or did not respond fast enough to the target. Participants showed greater neural activation during
the cue period in bilateral posterior cingulate and right orbitofrontal cortex when anticipating possible punishment
than when anticipating possible reward, suggesting that, even when reward and punishment motivate the same
overt behaviors, neural processes associated with these motivational processes still differ. Nevertheless, conjunction
analyses for possible punishment and possible reward cues revealed overlapping patterns of neural activation in
bilateral dorsal anterior cingulate, left putamen, and left insula, consistent with common neural mechanisms. These
findings support the operation of shared and distinct neural mechanisms of reward and punishment motivation even
when such motivational processes do not demand unique response preparations.
A – 42
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN OXTR METHYLATION AND ATTACHMENT ACROSS ADULTHOOD
Tian Lin – University of Florida; Melis Muradoglu – University of Florida; Devon Weir – University of Florida; Travis
Lillard – University of Virginia; Sue Carter – Kinsey Institute, Indiana University; Ronald A. Cohen – University of
Florida; Natalie C. Ebner – University of Florida
The neuropeptide oxytocin (OT) has been implicated in a wide range of affiliative processes. OT exerts its functions
via oxytocin receptors, which are encoded by the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR). Epigenetic modification of OXTR
through the process of DNA methylation has been associated with individual differences in behavioral phenotypes.
Specifically, lower levels of OXTR methylation have been linked to enhanced social and affective functioning.
However, research on epigenetic mechanisms of OXTR is scarce in non-clinical populations and even less is known
about changes across adulthood. The present study assessed OXTR methylation levels at site -934 (hg38,
chr3:8,769,121) in 22 young (20-31 years, M = 23.6) and 34 older (63-80 years, M = 71.4) participants. Lower levels
of OXTR methylation were associated with less attachment anxiety but higher attachment avoidance. These effects
of OXTR methylation on self-reported adult attachment were more pronounced in young than older participants and
were not mediated by plasma OT levels. These findings suggest that epigenetic properties of OXTR are related to
adult attachment, with variations across adulthood.
A – 43
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF OWNERSHIP
Patricia L. Lockwood – University of Oxford; Marco K. Wittmann – University of Oxford; Matthew A. J. Apps –
University of Oxford; Glyn Humphreys – University of Oxford; Matthew Rushworth – University of Oxford
How do we learn what objects in the world are “mine” and how do we learn what belongs to other people? Much of
our social lives require us to know what objects belong to whom. Multiple lines of evidence from social, language,
perceptual and memory domains have suggested that processing of information related to ourselves is facilitated,
such that it is better recalled and processed more rapidly than information related to other people. However, how
these biased associations are formed and the computational processes that underpin them are still poorly
understood. During fMRI, participants performed an associative learning task in which they were required to learn
which pictures belonged to themselves, their best friend or to a stranger. This allowed us to parametrically vary the
effects of interpersonal distance on ownership. After, participants rated how much they liked each picture. We found
evidence for a self-bias at multiple levels of behaviour. Participants liked pictures more that they have learnt belong
to themselves than to others (endowment bias). Participants were more likely to say something belonged to
themselves even with no prior information. Computational modelling of behavior showed that participants had a
higher learning rate when learning which pictures belonged to themselves than to others. Neurally, ownership
prediction errors (PEs) were commonly encoded in similar neural regions to reward PEs (ventral striatum/vmPFC).
However, ownership PEs were modulated by interpersonal distance with learning about those at a high level of
interpersonal distance also distinctly encoded in anterior cingulate gyrus and anterior insula.
A – 44
THE ROLE OF GDNF IN BIPOLAR DISORDER: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW
Robmarie Lopez-Soto – Ponce Health Sciences University; Fabian Vazquez – Ponce Health Sciences University; Janice
Monteiro – Ponce Health Sciences University; Jose Pons – Ponce Health Sciences University
Introduction: Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a neuroprogressive illness in which recurrent mood episodes provoke sustained
neurotoxic states associated with demyelination. Glial Cell-Line Derived Neurotrophic Factor (GDNF) is known to

	46

influence the development and survival of both glial cells and neurons (Tunca et al., 2014), particularly those within
the dopaminergic system, which is compromised during mania. Assessing the role of GDNF in BD would further
insight into the mechanisms that underlie manic switch and reward sensitivity in BD. Method: A search was
conducted on EBSCOHost, PubMed and Google Scholar, using the terms “gdnf” AND “bdnf” AND “mania” OR “bipolar
disorder”. Selection was limited to peer-reviewed studies published in English or Spanish. Literature reviews,
prospective studies, chapters and magazines were excluded. 196 articles were selected on the basis of relevance to
the topic of GDNF levels in subjects with BD. Repeated results, studies that did not assess BD or which assessed
GDNF levels in animal models were excluded. Seven studies were ultimately selected, assessed for methodology and
reviewed for results. Results: 5/7 studies found significantly higher levels of serum GDNF during mania; one study
found higher plasma levels of GDNF in euthymic subjects. Higher peripheral levels of GDNF were also found in
subjects with early onset BD (<19 yrs.), and those with BD-II. While lithium appears to exert significant regulatory
influence, dose and duration of treatment does not predict GDNF levels during euthymia. Conclusion: Increased
GDNF levels during mania appear to reflect impaired glial function in BD and warrant further study.
A – 45
DYADIC REGULATION OF REST AND MEDITATION: AN EEG INVESTIGATION
Erin L. Maresh – University of Virginia; James A. Coan – University of Virginia
Many studies have sought to identify neural correlates of meditative states. Yet, while meditation is often practiced
with others, few, if any, studies have investigated neural activity during meditation in a social context. We recruited
46 novice (<1 year) meditators and 67 meditation-naïve control participants to come to the lab in pairs. Participants
were assigned to be either alone or in the same room together as they underwent 6 minutes of rest followed by 10
minutes of a breath-focused task while EEG was recorded using 14-channel Emotiv headsets. Alpha power and
frontal alpha asymmetry scores were examined. Frontal and parietal-occipital alpha were greater for all participants
during the breath-focused task compared to rest, but within rest, alpha was higher for participants who were
together compared to alone. For participants who were together, meditators showed greater right frontal activity
during rest but greater left frontal activity during the task, whereas controls showed greater left frontal activity
during rest but greater right frontal activity during the task; no asymmetry differences between conditions were
observed in participants who were alone. Further, across all participants, trait anxiety and rumination predicted
greater left frontal activity at rest but greater right frontal activity during the breath-focused task, suggesting
differential roles for alpha asymmetry depending on the task (e.g., anxious apprehension vs. positive approach). In
sum, being with another person impacts the EEG correlates of both rest and a breath-focused task. The possible
roles of social proximity, trait moderators, and neurophysiological measurement are discussed.
A – 46
SUBJECTIVE BELONGING, DEHUMANISATION, AND STRESS HORMONES IN ENCAMPED SYRIAN
REFUGEES
Michael C. Niconchuk – University College London; Lasana T. Harris – University College London; Ana Guinote –
University College London
This study interrogated the role of subjective group belonging as a possible moderator of a hypothesised relationship
between powerlessness and victimhood, on the one hand, and aggression and dehumanisation, on the other, among
male Syrian refugees living in a refugee camp on the Jordanian-Syrian border (N=41; ages 22-32). Furthermore, we
assessed the relationship between refugees’ stress hormone levels, specifically cortisol (n=36), and testosterone
(n=32), and perceptions of belonging, reported aggression, and the dehumanisation of specific in- and out-groups
relevant to their experience of forced displacement. We found a significant relationship between victimhood,
powerlessness and components of aggression, but found no significant relationships between victimhood,
powerlessness, and dehumanisation. Results also indicate that subjective belonging is associated with a higher sense
of social power, as well as greater humanisation of certain sociocultural groups, though trait physical aggression may
moderate the belonging-humanisation relationship. Results also suggest a neuroendocrine footprint of subjective
belonging, and a link between testosterone and dehumanisation among refugees, that merits further investigation.
The study has far-reaching implications for future research at the nexus of social neuroendocrinology, trauma and
stress studies, and social cognition, as well as for individuals and institutions working in refugee relief and
integration.
A – 47
MULTIDIMENSIONAL EMOTION CONCEPT REPRESENTATIONS DEVELOP FROM CHILDHOOD TO
ADULTHOOD AND SCAFFOLD ON GENERAL VOCABULARY DEVELOPMENT
Erik C. Nook – Harvard University; Stephanie F. Sasse – Harvard University; Hilary K. Lambert – University of
Washington; Katie A. McLaughlin – University of Washington; Leah H. Somerville – Harvard University
The impact of neural development on social and affective processes is a central focus of psychological research.

	

47

Although substantial evidence demonstrates that adults typically understand emotions as multidimensional—with
valence (positive—negative) and arousal (activating—deactivating) as two primary dimensions—we know little about
how this representation develops. Given prior work on the development of emotion perception, we hypothesized that
(unlike adults) children primarily understand emotion concepts in terms of valence and learn to separate them based
on arousal as they age. We tested this hypothesis and also investigated mechanisms that could underlie emotion
concept development. Participants (N=203) aged 4 to 25 completed tasks assessing emotion concept representation
in which they i) sorted emotion words into piles based on similarity and ii) rated the similarities of 10 emotion words.
To investigate underlying mechanisms, we assessed participants’ verbal ability and their capacity to perceive two
dimensions simultaneously (rating similarities of circles that varied on two perceptual dimensions). Multidimensional
scaling analyses revealed that emotion concept representation shifted across age. As hypothesized, focus on the
valence dimension of emotions decreased with age, whereas focus on the arousal dimension increased with age. This
shift was not explained by developments in the general ability to perceive two dimensions simultaneously. However,
a mediation analysis demonstrated that increased verbal knowledge explained increases in arousal focus across
development. These results reveal the dynamic pathways through which emotion understanding develops and
suggest that complex emotion understanding scaffolds on expanding verbal knowledge across development.
A – 48
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR THE EFFECTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL ACHIEVEMENT GOALS ON
FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING IN A CHALLENGING GENERAL KNOWLEDGE TASK
Yuliya Ochakovskaya – The Graduate Center (CUNY); Jennifer Mangels – Baruch College (CUNY)
To motivate students toward academic success, instructors may instill classroom (environmental) achievement goals
that emphasize either information mastery (mastery goals) or performing better than others (performance goals).
Although environmental mastery goals have been associated with greater intrinsic motivation to learn, direct effects
on learning outcomes are mixed, and the mechanisms by which these goals act are largely unexplored. We propose
that environmental performance and mastery goals facilitate attention to goal-congruent information, which will be
evidenced by enhancement of event-related potentials (ERPs) to performance and learning-relevant information,
respectively. In the present study, participants generated responses to general knowledge questions under
instructional framing that emphasized either performance or mastery goals. After each response, participants
received accuracy feedback followed by learning feedback (correct answer). To measure the extent to which intrinsic
interest in learning was moderated by goals, surprise retests were administered the day of and a week later.
Emphasis on performance goals resulted in greater sustained attention (500-1000 ms) to positive compared to
negative accuracy feedback, as indexed by the late positive potential (LPP). However, for learning feedback,
emphasizing mastery goals led to a stronger relationship between memory-related activity and learning outcomes at
frontal sites (500-1500ms). No goal-related differences emerged for memory-related activity at temporoparietal sites.
Mastery goals were also associated with better error correction on both retests, suggesting that sustained frontal
activity supported elaborative processing that strengthened question-answer associations. These results suggest that
mastery goals support more sustained engagement with learning-relevant information, while performance goals
increase sensitivity to accuracy feedback.
A – 49
COMPUTATIONAL ANALYSIS OF MORAL CHOICES BETWEEN RACIAL IN- AND OUTGROUP MEMBERS
Philip Pärnamets – Karolinska Institutet; Tove Henlser – Karolinska Institutet; Andreas Olsson – Karolinska Institutet
Assigning moral value to an action typically involves evaluating both the action and the agent committing the action.
We have previously shown that evaluations of moral actions exhibit regularities in choice and response times that are
explained using simple computational models of choice. Here, we extend this approach to investigate if the decision
process underlying moral evaluations was altered when the agents belonged to a different (outgroup) as compared
to the same (ingroup) race as the participants. We adopted a simple value-based decision-making task. Participants
first rated a number of moral transgressions for blameworthiness. They then made forced choices between pairs of
agents represented by outgroup and ingroup faces each paired with one of the previously rated moral transgressions.
Participants were instructed to choose the agent they thought had behaved worst. We compared choices between
two Same-group agents and two Different-group agents. We found that both choice and response-time patterns
differed in the Different compared to the Same conditions. When the underlying valuations of the transgressions
were the same, participants preferred to blame the ingroup member, but took longer time to do so compared to
when blaming an outgroup member, suggesting that outgroup blame in these cases is the results of fast errors
rather than biased processing. Indeed, results can be explained through shifts in both drift and threshold parameters
of a drift-diffusion model. Our findings have implications for understanding the computational underpinning of moral
decision-making, and for how social cognition affects moral cognition in the moment of choice.

	48

A – 50
THE NEURAL BASIS OF EMPATHIC BLAME
Indrajeet Patil – Harvard University; Marta Calò – University of Trieste; Federico Fornasier – University of Trieste;
Fiery Cushman – Harvard University; Giorgia Silani – University of Vienna
Mature moral judgments rely both on a perpetrator’s intent to cause harm, and also on the actual harm caused—
even when unintended. Much prior research asks how intent information is neurally represented, but little asks how
even unintended harms influence judgment. We interrogate the psychological and neural basis of this process,
focusing especially on the role of empathy for the victim of a harmful act. Using fMRI, we found that- (a) the
‘empathy for pain’ network was involved in encoding harmful outcomes and (b) integrating harmfulness information
for different types of moral judgments, and (c) individual differences in the extent to which this network was active
during integration of harmfulness information determined severity of moral judgments. Additionally, activity in the
network was down-regulated for acceptability, but not blame, judgments for accidental harm condition, suggesting
that these two types of moral evaluations are neurobiologically dissociable. These results support a model of
“empathic blame”, whereby the perceived suffering of a victim colors moral judgment of an accidental harmdoer.
A – 51
INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE, ANXIETY, AND DEPRESSION IN UNIVERSITY STUDENTS:
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS OF A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY
Arif Pendi – University of California, Irvine; Danny Lee – Virginia Commonwealth University; Alfonso J. Valdez –
University of California, Irvine; Jose L. Aguilar – University of California, Riverside; Kate B. Wolitzky-Taylor –
University of California, Los Angeles; Joshua Lee – University of California, Los Angeles; Kasim Pendi – University of
California, Riverside; Safani David – University of California, Irvine
Introduction: Intimate partner violence has been known to lead to mental health consequences. Among university
students, the link between intimate partner abuse and depressive or anxiety disorders remains tenuous. Given the
large burden of depression and anxiety in university students, the relationship between intimate partner violence and
these illnesses has significant implications for preventative and screening efforts. Methods: A link to an anonymous
online survey was disseminated to professors to forward to their students at a large university in the United States.
The instrument consisted of a socio-demographic questionnaire, HITS Domestic Violence Screening Tool, Generalized
Anxiety Scale 7 (GAS-7), and Patient Health Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9). Responses were considered positive or
negative for intimate partner violence based on score on HITS. The aforementioned groups were then compared in
terms of scores on the GAS-7 and PHQ-9 scales for generalized anxiety and depression, respectively. Results:
Preliminary findings indicate that of 396 respondents, 18 screened positive for intimate partner violence. This group
exhibited more anxiety (10.83±5.711 versus 6.23±5.355; p=0.003) and depression (12.06±6.384 versus
7.34±6.266; p=0.007) compared to respondents that screened negative for intimate partner violence. Conclusions:
Intimate partner violence was significantly associated with both generalized anxiety and depression in a sample of
American university students. These preliminary results underscore a need to potentially screen for anxiety and
depression in students that have experienced intimate partner abuse.
A – 52
EFFECTS OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX DAMAGE ON EMOTION UNDERSTANDING: EEG AND BEHAVIORAL
EVIDENCE
Anat Perry – University of California, Berkeley; Samantha Saunders – University of California, Berkeley; Jennifer Stiso
– University of California, Berkeley; Callum Dewar – University of California, Berkeley; Jamie Lubell – Universitetet i
Oslo; Torstein Meling – Oslo Universitetssykehus; Tor Endestad – Oslo University Hospital; Anne-Kristin Sobakk –
Universitetet i Oslo, Universitetssykehus, Helgeland Hospital; Robert Knight – University of California, Berkeley
Humans are highly social beings, and are considered experts in identifying others’ actions and inferring their
intentions, thoughts and feelings. One of the major theories accounting for this ability assumes that the
understanding of social signals is based on a primordial tendency to simulate observed actions by activating a mirror
neuron system (MNS). If the MNS is important for action and emotion recognition, damage to regions in this network
should lead to deficits in these domains. In the current behavioral and EEG study, we focused on the lateral
prefrontal cortex (LPFC) and utilized a series of task paradigms, each measuring a different aspect of recognizing
others actions or emotions from body cues. We examined 17 patients with lesions including (N=8) or not including
(N=9) the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), a core MNS region, and compared their performance to matched healthy
controls (N=18), in behavioral tasks and in an EEG task measuring mu suppression. Our results provide support for
the role of the LPFC in understanding others, by showing that even unilateral lesions result in deficits in both
accuracy and reaction time in tasks involving the recognition of others’ emotions, with only an increase in reaction
time for action recognition. In tasks involving the recognition of actions, patients showed a general increase in
reaction time, but not a reduction in accuracy. Deficits in emotion recognition can be seen by either direct damage to
the IFG, or via damage to LPFC regions, resulting in deteriorated performance and less EEG mu suppression.

	

49

A – 53
THE ROLE OF PUPIL SIZE AND PUPIL MIMICRY IN TRUST: FMRI STUDY
Eliska Prochazkova – Leiden University; Luisa Prochazkova – Leiden University; Carsten KW De Dreu – Leiden
University; Steven Scholte – University of Amsterdam; Mariska E. Kret – Leiden University
In order to decide whether to trust someone or not, people generally make eye contact. During this process, pupils
of interacting partners tend to align, aiding this decision. Interestingly, previous research shows that if both partners'
pupils synchronously dilate, pupil-synchronization promotes trust. The function and neural mechanisms of pupilsynchronization are thus far unknown but two hypotheses are at stake: A) As pupil dilation might indicate arousal, it
is possible that pupil-synchronization helps people to recognize socially arousing or ‘threatening’ situations or,
alternatively, B) it enhances the ability to understand others’ emotions - a theory of mind (TOM) hypothesis. To test
these hypotheses, we conducted a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study where we tested the effect
of (virtual) partner’s pupil size changes and own pupillary responses on subject’s trust decisions during incentive trust
games. In line with the second hypothesis, results showed that the mimicry of partners’ dilating pupils was
associated with higher trust levels and increased neural activity in the TOM network (precuneus, temporo-parietal
junction, medial prefrontal cortex and superior temporal sulcus). These findings indicate that pupil mimicry is
involved in higher level social cognition as opposed to simply being a threat-processing mechanism restricted to
subcortical structures (amygdala, hippocampus). Apart from contributing to the field of emotional contagion, by
examining the neural mechanisms of pupil mimicry, the current study is the first to provide a neurocognitive link
between pupil mimicry and trust decisions.
A – 54
CULTURE MODULATES THE NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING RISKY EXPLORATION
Yang Qu – Stanford University; Lynda Lin – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Eva Telzer – University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Cross-cultural developmental research suggests that real-life risk taking (e.g., stealing and substance use) may differ
across cultures. For example, risk taking is more common among American than Chinese youth (Greenberger et al.,
2000). Although recent neuroimaging studies provide valuable insights into neural basis of risk taking, they mainly
focus on Western samples. To address this issue, the current study examined cultural similarities and differences in
neural processes underlying risk taking. 46 American and Chinese participants underwent an fMRI scan while
completing the Balloon Analogue Risk Task, a widely used risk-taking task (Lejuez et al., 2003). Although American
and Chinese participants did not differ in overall risk taking on the task, American participants showed significant
greater risky exploration, as indicated by greater within-person variation of risk taking, compared with their Chinese
counterparts. At the neural level, across the two cultures, participants showed heightened activation in the medial
prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, ventral striatum, and insula when they took increasing risks. Cross-cultural
comparisons indicated that compared with their Chinese counterparts, American participants showed greater
activation in the ventral striatum, a neural region involved in reward processing, when they took increasing risks.
Such neural activation in the ventral striatum was positively associated with participants’ risky exploration. Taken
together, despite some shared neural processes underlying risk taking in American and Chinese individuals, they also
show distinct neural processing. American (vs. Chinese) participants show more reward-related activation when they
take greater risks, suggesting that culture plays a role in modulating neural basis of risky exploration.
A – 55
PROBING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SADNESS INTROSPECTION: A NEW VARIATION OF A FACEEMOTION FMRI TASK
Shawn A. Rhoads – University of California, Davis; Veronika Vilgis – University of California, Davis; Erika E. Forbes –
University of Pittsburgh; Alison E. Hipwell – University of Pittsburgh; Kate Keenan – University of Chicago; Amanda E.
Guyer – University of California, Davis
Social interactions often involve processing others’ emotions gleaned from their facial expressions. FMRI tasks have
been widely-used to understand what functions and under which conditions the brain operates during face
processing. The current study presents a new variation of a face-emotion task designed to have participants reflect
upon their subjectively experienced sadness (i.e., sadness introspection) when viewing others’ emotions, given
known deficits in sadness regulation associated with depression. Recruited from the Pittsburgh Girls Study, 117 girls
(16-years-old) underwent functional neuroimaging while viewing 48 facial expressions (12 sad, 12 angry, 12 happy,
12 neutral) and rated each while judging “How sad does this face make you feel?” and “How wide is the nose?”
(1=not at all to 5=very much). To verify and compare neural activation between conditions, a whole-brain analysis
was conducted using a 2 (Attention) x 4 (Emotion) repeated-measures analysis of variance with a flexible factorial
design. Consistent with neuroimaging literature on mentalizing and emotion introspection, a main effect of attention
revealed greater activation in bilateral superior temporal sulcus, bilateral intraparietal sulcus, medial prefrontal
cortex, and left anterior insula for sadness introspection vs. nose-width, F(1,812)=23.13, FWE-corr. p<0.001. Greater

	50

activation emerged in face and visual processing regions for nose-width vs. sadness introspection. The main effect of
emotion and emotion X attention interaction effect were non-significant. The task effectively engaged key neural
regions implicated in introspection and socioemotional processing in typical and clinical samples, and holds promise
for identifying perturbed patterns of brain function related to sadness introspection and adolescent depression.
A – 56
LEARNING BIASES RENDER ADOLESCENTS VULNERABLE TO DROP IN SELF-ESTEEM FOLLOWING PEER
EVALUATION
Alexandra M. Rodman – Harvard University; Katherine E. Powers – Harvard University; Erik K. Kastman – Harvard
University; Leah H. Somerville – Harvard University
Adolescence is a phase of the lifespan characterized by drops in self-esteem, although the mechanisms underlying
this shift are poorly understood. This study examines whether biases in feedback-based learning contributes to
adolescents’ shifting self-views. 107 participants aged 9-23 completed an fMRI experimental task that involved
receiving positive and negative peer evaluation that was consistent or inconsistent with the participant’s
expectations. Following the scan, participants were given a surprise memory test to evaluate biases in learning. Data
analyses tested for developmental differences in predicted rates of positive vs. negative feedback, memory for
feedback types, and post-pre task shifts in self-esteem. Adolescent-specific differences were observed on all three
measures. Younger participants predicted that peers would like them less frequently. Adolescents demonstrated
biased learning in the face of social rejection. When examining whether the social evaluation would lead to
downstream changes in self-esteem, we found that early adolescents exhibited a unique drop in self-esteem as a
result of the task. Future analyses will probe whether corticostriatal functioning supports these learning biases and
associated changes in self-views during adolescence. This work will extend theoretical models of development, and
identify a mechanism that links peer rejection with alterations in self-esteem.
A – 57
MOTIVATIONAL INFLUENCES ON PERCEPTUAL JUDGMENTS: WHAT WE WANT CHANGES WHAT WE SEE
Deshawn Sambrano – California State University, Fullerton; Yuan Chang Leong – Stanford University; Jamil Zaki –
Stanford University
People tend to think of perception as a veridical representation of the physical world. However, previous work
suggests that goals and desires can bias what people see. In this study, we investigated how financial incentives
biased participants’ perceptual judgments. Participants were presented with videos of moving dots, in which a
proportion of dots were moving in a coherent direction, and were rewarded for correctly indicating the motion
direction of these “signal dots”. The remaining dots moved randomly. We manipulated the difficulty on each trial by
varying the proportion of signal dots. On a subset of the trials, we paired participants with a partner, who placed a
bet on the direction of signal dots for the following trial. If the bet is correct, the participant wins an additional
bonus. If the bet is incorrect, the participant loses money. As such, participants were motivated to see the motion
direction consistent with the bet. However, to earn the maximum reward, participants should ignore the bet and
indicate the motion direction as accurately as possible. Nevertheless, we found that participants were biased to see
the motion direction they were motivated to see. Furthermore, participants were slower to make motivationally
inconsistent judgments, suggesting greater decision conflict on these trials. Our findings suggest that motivational
forces can bias perceptual judgments, and the old adage of ‘seeing is believing’ should be taken with circumspect
and caution. Future work will use mouse-tracking to examine the trajectory of this bias at a finer temporal scale.
A – 58
QUANTIFYING AND COMPARING THE SELFISH AND PRO-SOCIAL CONFORMITY
Bo Shen – Peking University; Binxu	Wang – Peking University; Hongbo Yu – Peking University; Xiaolin Zhou – Peking
University
In the current study we appealed to reinforcement learning model to quantify social conformity behavior. Participants
were separated into cohorts and played a public money taking game. In each trial, participants in the same cohort
were given the same amount of money from a public pool, and took any amount for him/herself. At the same time,
they could observe taken money of one randomly chosen other participant. Money left by this cohort was then
allocated to participants in subsequent cohorts. Even though payoffs in the same cohorts were independent, taken
money of others (MO) had significant Granger Causal influence on taken money of self (MS). Participants learned to
be selfish when observing MO > MS, and learned to be pro-social when observing MO < MS. Social conformity
behavior was then compared to reinforcement learning process, and fitted by a selfish/pro-social learning model to
predict MS in each trial using MO. The learning model revealed that selfish learning rateαwas greater than pro-social
learning rate β. Post-experiment questionnaire results showed that participants’ shame-withdraw scores correlated
negatively with α and positively with β, suggesting that participants with stronger shame-withdraw tendencies were
less likely to be influenced by others’ selfish behavior and more likely to be influenced by others’ altruistic behavior.

	

51

By using computational modeling, the current study showed that individuals are more likely to conform to others’
selfish behavior than to pro-social behavior. Moreover, moral sentiments may have strong influence on individuals’
social conformity rates.
A – 59
THE DYNAMICS OF MIXED EMOTIONS IN MUSIC AND MOVEMENT
Beau Sievers – Dartmouth College; Thalia Wheatley – Dartmouth College
Dynamics, the change in a stimulus over time, powerfully predict emotion perception. Most studies of mixed emotion
use naturalistic stimuli that include both dynamics and context-dependent semantic content. We assess whether
mixed emotions can be expressed and perceived based on dynamics alone, and whether the same dynamics express
the same emotions across modalities. We designed a computer program for generating examples of music and
movement based on a small set of crossmodally matched dynamic features: rate, jitter (regularity of rate), direction,
step size, and dissonance/visual spikiness. We split participants into two groups, a music group and a movement
group. Participants (n=50) used our program to express five emotions: Angry, Happy, Peaceful, Sad, and Scared. We
extrapolated from these data to create many examples of each emotion, as well as every possible mix of two
emotions, interpolated at 25%, 50% and 75%. We asked a separate group of participants (n=72) to rate these
music and movement stimuli on the five emotion dimensions independently. We tested which mixed emotions in
music and movement are perceptible based on dynamics alone, without additional context or semantic information.
Finally, we presented prototypical and mixed emotions in music and movement to participants undergoing functional
magnetic resonance imaging (n=20). Searchlight classification and representational similarity analyses were used find
brain areas that distinguish mixed from prototypical emotions.
A – 60
FROM AGENTS TO ACTIONS TO INTERACTIONS: UNCOVERING MULTIPLE SOCIAL NETWORKS IN THE
PRIMATE BRAIN
Julia Sliwa – The Rockefeller University; Winrich A. Freiwald – The Rockefeller University
Primates continuously decode the complex visual scenes unwinding in front of them into physical entities, such as
agents and objects, and their flow of interactions. Understanding interactions is a core cognitive component in
primates and is particularly vulnerable to social pathologies. Neural representations of faces, bodies, objects, and
their movement have been found in and around the superior temporal sulcus (STS). However, little is known about
the brain regions that analyze social and physical interactions. Here we show, using whole brain functional magnetic
resonance imaging in rhesus monkeys, that interaction observation engages three major brain systems in functionally
distinct ways: First, when agents and objects are combined into evocative scenes of interactions, they change early
visual representations of individuals and objects in the STS. Second, passive observation of both physical and social
interactions automatically engages two motor planning areas, in posterior parietal and premotor cortex that colocalize with the mirror neuron system (MNS), suggesting a general role of the MNS for social and physical world
understanding. Finally, social interactions selectively recruit an additional extensive system of distributed brain areas
comprised of the medial-prefrontal cortex, ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal lobule (7a), and temporal
pole – in a way functionally similar to the Default Mode Network in humans and overlapping with areas that in
humans subserve Theory of Mind. The existence of multiple networks for interactions processing in the primate brain
shows the cognitive importance and computational challenges of interaction analysis in revealing the hidden
intricacies of a primate’s world.
A – 61
SOCIAL REWARD AND ALPHA ASYMMETRY IN ASD
Katherine KM Stavropoulos – University of California, Riverside; Leslie J. Carver – University of California, San Diego
The social motivation hypothesis posits that individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are less motivated to
socially engage because they find interactions less rewarding than their typically developing (TD) peers. The current
investigation measured alpha asymmetry (8-12Hz) and theta activity (4-7Hz) during reward anticipation. We
performed novel EEG analyses in children with and without ASD (Stavropoulos & Carver, 2013). Children were
presented with reward indicators accompanied by face or non-face (arrow) stimuli. Participants were 6-8 year-old
children with (n = 20) and without (n = 20) ASD. In the alpha band, a significant Condition x Group interaction was
observed (p = .053). Follow-up tests revealed (1) marginal effect of condition in the ASD group (p = .058); (2)
marginal effect of the face condition between groups (p = .066). A significant correlation was observed between
alpha asymmetry in the arrow condition and ADOS severity (p= .01) such that children who evidenced more alpha
asymmetry had more severe symptoms of ASD. No effects were observed in the theta band. We provide novel
evidence that alpha activity during reward anticipation is different in children with and without ASD. Children with
ASD evidenced more left-dominant activation when anticipating rewards accompanied by arrows compared to
rewards accompanied by faces. TD children evidenced more left-dominant activation when anticipating faces

	52

compared to children with ASD. The findings support the social motivation hypothesis, and extend it by suggesting
that children with ASD may have too much non-social motivation, which comes at the expense of social motivation.
A – 62
GENERATIVE MODELING OF WEIGHTED BRAIN NETWORKS
Paul E. Stillman – Ohio State University; James D. Wilson – San Francisco University; Matthew J. Denny – Penn State
University; Bruce Desmarais – Penn State University; Shankar Bhamidi – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill;
Skyler Cranmer – Ohio State University; Zhong-Lin Lu – Ohio State University
There has been a recent explosion in research using graph theory to investigate how networks of brain regions
interact to produce cognition and behavior. However, most available modeling techniques adopt a descriptive rather
than generative modeling approach, and the majority of contemporary methods (and all contemporary generative
methods) require researchers to threshold weighted correlation networks into binary networks, discarding a large
amount of potentially critical information. The present research integrates recent advances from network science and
neuroscience to address these issues. Specifically, we develop the correlation Generalized Exponential Random Graph
Model (cGERGM) – a generative modeling approach that uses local processes in the network to capture the emergent
functional organization of the brain without any loss of information. We demonstrate the potential of using the
cGERGM to quantify brain networks using connectivity data from the default mode network. In particular, we show
that the connectivity of the default mode network exhibits heightened triadic closure (a measure of clustering), and
lower preferential attachment (a measure of hub use) than would be expected by chance. We further find that
Euclidean distance between nodes has no effect on the connectivity between nodes. Finally, we show that the
cGERGM both produces excellent fit to real brain data, and simulates realistic brain networks, making it a powerful
and fully-featured model for studying weighted brain networks.
A – 63
NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL CORRELATES OF ALTRUISM IN ADOLESCENTS
Sarah M. Tashjian – University of California, Los Angeles; David Weissman – University of California, Davis; Amanda
E. Guyer – University of California, Davis; Adriana Galván – University of California, Los Angeles
Altruistic behavior is related to psychosocial benefits including happiness (Aknin et al., 2013), peer acceptance
(Layous et al., 2012), self-esteem (Bandura et al., 2001), and lower depression (Telzer et al., 2014). Extant research
suggests altruism develops with age but adolescent altruism has received considerably less attention than negative
outcomes such as adolescent antisocial behavior. Given ties to well-being and emerging literature suggesting
adolescence may be a period for positive development, we seek to investigate the correlates of adolescent altruistic
behavior. The aims are to determine (1) whether evaluating others behaving altruistically influences adolescents’
willingness to act altruistically themselves (behavioral phase, 60 adolescents/young adults ages 13-22), (2) the
neural correlates of evaluating altruism and whether differences predict behavior (fMRI phase, 20 adolescents ages
13-18). Data collection will be completed February 2017. In both phases, participants evaluate images of altruistic,
social, and neutral behavior (independently validated for interpretation/valence) and have the opportunity to donate
to a youth charity. Preliminary analyses with a modest sample size (N = 32) reveal a trend in the expected direction;
participants who viewed the stimuli prior to donation donated more than those who viewed the stimuli after
donating. All fMRI participants will view images prior to donation. We anticipate greater ventral striatum and greater
anterior prefrontal activation while viewing altruistic images compared to neutral/social will relate to increased
donations. Analyses will include reaction time, image rating, and survey measures of altruistic and prosocial
tendencies. Results will help address the gap in knowledge regarding altruistic behavior during adolescence.
A – 64
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF OTHERS’ MENTAL STATES GROW LESS DISTINCT WITH
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCE
Mark A. Thornton – Harvard University; Miriam E. Weaverdyck – Princeton University; Diana I. Tamir – Princeton
University
To successfully navigate the social world, one must understand other people’s mental states. What principles guide
the way people think about others’ minds? One likely candidate is psychological distance: how close one feels to the
person in question. In the present study, we examined the possibility that psychological distance acts on social
perception much like physical distance acts on visual perception: by making the objects of perception fuzzier and less
distinct. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that people have highly distinct neural representations of their own
mental states, but that these representations become less distinct when considering increasingly psychologically
distant people. To test this hypothesis, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to scan the brains of
participants while they judged the mental states of three targets: the self, a similar friend, and a dissimilar stranger.
Using representational similarity searchlight analysis, we examined the distinctiveness of state-specific activity
patterns for each target. Within a network of regions associated with social cognition – including medial prefrontal

	

53

and parietal cortices and the temporoparietal junction – we found that increasing psychological distance resulted in
less distinct activity patterns for different mental states. Thus, for example, one’s own self-consciousness was quite
distinct from one’s own earnestness, but when a stranger experienced these states, they actually seemed quite
similar. This neural effect converged with behavioral findings from a separate group of participants who explicitly
rated mental states to be more similar when considering those states in the minds of psychologically distant targets.
A – 65
SOCIAL CONTEXT MODERATES NEURAL PROCESSING OF CHOICE INFORMATION
Steven Tompson – University of Pennsylvania; Sarah Huff – University of Michigan; Carolyn Yoon – University of
Michigan; Anthony King – University of Michigan; Israel Liberzon – University of Michigan; Emily B. Falk – University
of Pennsylvania; Danielle S. Bassett – University of Pennsylvania; Shinobu Kitayama – University of Michigan
Decision-making often requires integrating complex information about the choice. Recent work suggests that
cognitive judgments and working memory performance is facilitated by dynamic flexibility of networks of brain
regions and connectivity between regions in these networks. It is therefore possible that these networks are also
important for processing complex information about decisions. Moreover, research has shown that these judgments
and decisions are influenced by social context, but it is unknown whether these same social processes (e.g., culture,
social network size, etc.) directly influence brain networks underlying judgments and decision-making. Using brain
data from individuals who evaluated choice options before and after making difficult choices either for the self or a
close friend, we examined how patterns of activation within brain regions as well as patterns of activation across
networks of brain regions are associated with processing and representing choice information. We found that
European Americans represented choice outcome (chosen versus rejected) in medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC),
whereas East Asians represented choice outcome in temporoparietal junction (TPJ). Both European Americans and
East Asians represented choice target (self versus friend) in mPFC and TPJ. This research suggests that these brain
regions might represent and process different types of information for people from different cultural contexts.
Implications for how social context moderates brain regions and brain networks involved in decision-making will be
discussed.
A – 66
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF FEEDBACK ON WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE
Nancy Tsai – University of California, Irvine; Susanne Jaeggi – University of California, Irvine
Working memory (WM) varies greatly amongst individuals. Such variance in WM may reflect differences in conditions
that tax the system such as affect. The use of feedback can induce affective changes and is one of the mostly widely
applied psychological interventions aimed to improve performance. However, there is growing evidence that
feedback yields variable effects on performance. In our study, participants from the US and China were presented
fictitious positive or negative feedback during a visual N-Back task. The results indicate that participants in the US
and China were differentially affected by feedback in their N-Back performance: In the US, positive feedback
improved accuracy while negative feedback impaired accuracy. In China, positive feedback improved reaction time
while negative feedback impaired reaction time. Measurements of affect, stress, motivation, locus of control, theories
of cognitive abilities, as well as other mindset differences were included for exploratory purposes.
A – 67
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN THE HUMAN BRAIN PREDICTS ENDOGENOUS VARIATION IN MORAL
PHENOTYPE
Jeroen M. van Baar – Radboud University; Luke J. Chang – Dartmouth College; Alan G. Sanfey – Radboud University
Why do people often behave kindly to one other, even when this comes at a personal cost? Several different
motivations have been suggested to explain these prosocial decisions. Here we propose that the particular mix of
motives driving one’s social decisions, or ‘moral phenotype’, varies endogenously in the population. We use a novel
economic game to demonstrate stable variation in moral phenotype for reciprocity, capture individual differences
using computational modeling, and show that our Motivational Mix Model better explains observed behavior than
previously proposed models. Next, we elucidate the neural correlates of moral phenotype using functional MRI. We
demonstrate that functional connectivity from right temporoparietal junction and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
to the rest of the brain is predictive of moral phenotype. These findings provide a new avenue into the study of moral
decision-making.
A – 68
RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AND COSTLY ALTRUISM: A GRAPH THEORETICAL
APPROACH
Kruti M. Vekaria – Georgetown University; Charles J. Lynch – Georgetown University; Kristin M. Brethel-Haurwitz –
Georgetown University; Elise M. Cardinale – Georgetown University; Abigail A. Marsh – Georgetown University

	54

Costly altruism involves taking significant risks to benefit another person. When that person is a stranger, dominant
theories cannot easily explain the occurrence of such behavior; identifying neural mechanisms that support
extraordinary altruism may be illuminating. Task-based fMRI studies implicate increased volume and heightened
sensitivity to distress cues in the amygdalas of altruists relative to controls. The amygdala has been described as a
hub of affective processing networks due to its extensive connectivity with brain regions associated with emotion,
motivation, and executive function. Recent work has found differences in network-based resting state functional
connectivity (rsFC) among individuals who score higher on laboratory-based measures of cooperation. However, no
research has yet examined how rsFC corresponds to real-world costly altruism. To investigate this, we collected 7
minutes of resting state fMRI data in a sample of altruistic kidney donors (n=19) and matched controls (n=20).
Following preprocessing, cortical surfaces were generated in Freesurfer and the denoised fMRI time-series data was
mapped onto the midthickness surface. We selected an independent parcellation of the human brain as our regionsof-interest and computed the temporal correlation between each parcel, resulting in parcel-by-parcel functional
connectivity matrices across a range of thresholds (.90-.99). Betweenness centrality (BC), a graph theory metric
reflecting the centrality (“hubness”) of a region in a network, was computed using each binarized matrix. Results of
an independent samples t-test show decreased average BC of right amygdala in altruists relative to controls,
suggesting that in altruists this region is more segregated in its network connectivity.
A – 69
EXPERIENTIAL EMOTION REGULATION VERSUS COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL: EFFECTS ON AFFECT AFTER
STRESS AND FOLLOW-UP SLEEP PHYSIOLOGY
Yulin Wang – Vrije Universiteit Brussel & University of Gent; Iris Vantieghem – Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Jenny
Kestemont – Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Luis Carlo Bulnes – Vrije Universiteit Brussel & Université Libre de Bruxelles;
Marie Vandekerckhove – Vrije Universiteit Brussel
The interesting idea that emotion regulation (ER) plays a key role in modulating effects of stress on sleep, however,
has received few research attention. In the current study, we compared the impact of an 'experiential ER' versus a
'cognitive reappraisal' on subjective affect after stress and the following sleep physiology. 43 participants are
recruited and randomly assigned to 3 groups: 15, 13, 15 for experiential, reappraisal and neutral non-specific
regulation respectively. 20-Item Toronto Alexithymia and Emotional Approach Coping Scale are used to address the
individual difference. All participants spend 3 nights (adaption, baseline and experimental night) in the sleep lab (8h).
An emotional failure induction was used to trigger stress, followed by ER two times. Subject negative affect were
obtained by PANAS. We found Subjective Negative affect (NA) after the failure task is significantly higher than that
after movie (t (43) =-4.70, p<.01); but no difference in NA between experiential and reappraisal group (F (2, 34)
=1.08, p=. 35; F (2, 34)=1.70, p=0.20). Latency to S1 depending on ER types: reappraisal versus experiential: t
(26) = -2.98, p<.01; Experiential versus neutral: t (28) =1.80, p=.08. % REM-sleep tendency was found to be more
rigid in individuals scoring higher on alexithymia. Higher REM-latency for individuals scoring higher on alexithymia (F
(1,32)=4.46, p=.04). Longer Total Sleep Time for individuals scoring moderately on EAC in the experiential condition
(F (6,30)=3.22, p=.02). Our results indicated the difference between ´experiential approach´ and ´cognitive
approach´ strategy in decreasing the detrmental effect of stress on sleep.
A – 70
LOOMING THREATS AND ANIMACY: REDUCED RESPONSIVENESS IN YOUTH WITH DISRUPTIVE
BEHAVIOR DISORDERS
Stuart F. White – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Laura C. Thornton – Boys Town National Research Hospital;
Joseph Leshin – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Roberta Clanton – University of Birmingham; Stephen
Sinclair – National Institute of Mental Health; Dionne S. Coker-Appiah – Georgetown University School of Medicine;
Harma Meffert – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Soonjo Hwang – University of Nebraska Medical Center;
James R. Blair – Boys Town National Research Hospital
Atypical responses in threat circuitry (amygdala, periaqueductal gray [PAG]) have been implicated in the
development of Disruptive Behavior Disorders (DBDs; Conduct Disorder/Oppositional Defiant Disorder). However,
relatively little neuro-imaging work has examined the extent to which Callous-Unemotional (CU) Traits modulate this
responsiveness or whether disrupted responsiveness is seen for animate and inanimate threats. 31 youth with DBDs
and 27 typically developing youth, matched for IQ, age and gender, completed a threat paradigm during fMRI. The
paradigm involved the presentation of (i) threatening and animate (e.g. snarling dogs); (ii) threatening and
inanimate (e.g. pointed gun); (iii) neutral and animate (e.g. sitting rabbit); or neutral and inanimate (e.g. a mug)
images which loomed towards or receded from the participant. Youth with DBDs showed reduced responsiveness to
threat information within basic threat circuitry and particularly to animate (relative to inanimate) threat stimuli within
inferior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus and inferior parietal cortex. CU traits did not modulate responsiveness to
threat information within basic threat circuitry, but were inversely associated with: (i) response to mid-level threat
stimuli within frontal cortex, superior temporal gyrus and inferior parietal cortex; and (ii) animate stimuli within

	

55

posterior cingulate cortex. Youth with DBDs show generally reduced threat responsiveness that was only modulated
by level of CU traits in cortical regions, not basic threat systems.
A – 71
THE ROLE OF THE VENTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND ITS NEURAL NETWORKS IN SEXUAL
RISK: EVIDENCE FROM AN EROTIC GO/NOGO TASK AND REAL-LIFE RISK TAKING
Feng Xue – University of Southern California; Emily E. Barkeley-Levenson – Hofstra University; Vita Droutman –
University of Southern California; Benjamin J. Smith – University of Southern California; Gui Xue – Beijing Normal
University; Zhong-Lin Lu – Ohio State University; Antoine Bechara – University of Southern California; Lynn C. Miller
– University of Southern California; Stephen J. Read – University of Southern California
We tested the hypothesis that individual differences in neural correlates of response inhibition would be most
strongly related to real-world risk taking when people have to inhibit responses to highly motivationally relevant
stimuli. Gay participants performed an erotic go/nogo task when being scanned in an MRI scanner. Participants’ realworld risk taking was correlated with their gray matter density and neural activity during the task. These analyses
identified a common area in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC). We found gray mater density and neural
activity in the common vlPFC were both negatively correlated with participants’ real-world risk taking. Finally, neural
network centered in vlPFC and relationship with participants’ real-world risk taking were demonstrated in a series of
generalized form of context-dependent psychophysiological interactions analyses. Our results extend the literature by
demonstrating the vlPFC as an important locus of risky decision-making and its possible role in response inhibition.
A – 72
DIFFERENTIAL INVOLVEMENT OF FRONTOPOLAR CORTICAL SUBREGIONS IN UTILIZING SOCIAL
FEEDBACK HISTORY WHEN EVALUATING OTHERS
Leehyun Yoon – Korea University; Hackjin Kim – Korea University
Critical for survival is the capacity to accurately assess how well one is doing and adaptively change one’s behavior
based on such information. The present study investigated how our brain keeps the record of previous social
feedbacks and integrates them to guide our on-going social decisions. 60 participants between the ages of 10 and 25
years were instructed to make simple but creative artworks in the first session of the study. After two weeks, they
ostensibly evaluated each other’s works reciprocally while being scanned. In the first phase of each trial, participants
received fictitious feedback regarding the creativity of their own works from partners with similar age. In the second
phase, they evaluated the creativity of the same partners’ works. Behavioral results revealed a robust interaction
between feedback history type and age group. Specifically, two young age groups (i.e., children and early
adolescents), late adolescents, and adults utilized a current feedback (1FB), accumulation of recent two feedbacks
(2FB), and accumulation of all the feedbacks (AllFB), respectively, for evaluating their partners’ works in a selfenhancing way. Parametric modulation analysis of the fMRI data using the parameters of 1FB, 2FB, and AllFB at the
time of feedback receipt revealed that the medial, intermediate, and lateral subregions of the frontopolar cortex
(FPC) encode 1FB, 2FB and AllFB, respectively. These results suggest that the distinctive subregions along the
medial-to-lateral axis of the FPC are differentially involved in integrating previous social feedback history, potentially
contributing to the developmental changes in social evaluative decision biases.
A – 73
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN BRAIN NETWORKS INVOLVED IN PROCESSING EYE-GAZE AND EMOTIONAL
CUES
Maryam Ziaei – University of Queensland; Hana Burianová – Swansea University; William von Hippel – University of
Queensland; Natalie C. Ebner – University of Florida; Louise H. Phillips – University of Aberdeen; Julie D. Henry –
University of Queensland
Ageing is associated with difficulties integrating important social cues to emotion, including facial affect and eye-gaze
cues, but there is limited understanding of the neural substrates underpinning age-related differences in perceiving
these cues. The primary aim of this study was to investigate age-related changes in brain activity during recognition
of emotional expressions which differed in eye-gaze directions. In an fMRI experiment, younger and older adults
were asked to identify happy, angry, and neutral facial expressions displayed either with direct or averted eye-gaze
directions. While younger adults showed neural sensitivity to eye gaze during recognizing angry expressions, older
adults demonstrated neural dedifferentiation to these stimuli. In contrast, older adults showed sensitivity to eye-gaze
cues during recognition of happy expressions. Additionally, brain-behavior correlations were conducted to investigate
how perceiving facial cues were related to higher social-cognitive functions such as theory of mind ability in both age
groups. Older adults’ insensitivity to eye gaze during recognition of angry expressions was related to the decreased
recruitment of the main nodes of the mentalizing network, e.g. medial prefrontal cortex, where interpreting the
intentions of the expresser is important; angry expressions with averted gaze. In contrast, younger adults’ socialcognitive performance was differentially correlated with activation in two brain networks as a function of eye-gaze

	56

directions during recognition of angry facial expressions. Our findings are the first to suggest that age-related
differences in integration of facial cues may be related to engagement of the mentalizing network, which has
important implications for social-cognitive functioning in late adulthood.
A – 74
HEARTBREAK ON MY MIND: AN EFFECT OF HEARTBREAK ON INCIDENTAL AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
MEMORY, BUT NOT GENERAL AFFECTIVE INFORMATION PROCESSING
Rachel Brenner – Iowa State University; Robert West – DePauw University
The experience of heartbreak following the end of a romantic relationship has been associated with poor mental
health outcomes, including elevated levels of depression. Recent behavioral work reveals that the retrieval of both
positive and negative autobiographical memories related to a previous romantic relationship may be associated with
negative affect in heartbroken individuals. This is in contrast to the retrieval of positive memories related to other
relationships that are associated with positive affect. In the current study, we sought to examine the neural basis the
effect of heartbreak on autobiographical memory using event-related brain potentials (ERPs). In the study, women
experiencing heartbreak (N=7) and women in a romantic relationship (N=14) performed a picture rating task
wherein they saw normative pictures from the IAPS set and pictures related to a former or current romantic
relationship, and rated how positive or negative each picture were in separate blocks of trials. The ERP data revealed
that the neural correlates of affective information processing related to the IAPS pictures were similar in the two
groups. In contrast, autobiographical memory was associated with different ERPs in the two groups over the frontal
and posterior regions of the scalp. In the heartbreak group, autobiographical memories were contrasted with positive
normative pictures. In the romantic control group, autobiographical memories were contrasted with negative
normative pictures. These findings are consistent with the idea that the emergence or persistent of heartbreak is
associated with an alteration in the experience of autobiographical memories related to the prior relationship.

Poster Session B
Friday, March 17, 3:30 – 5:00 PM
B – 1 *SANS Poster Award winner*
COMPARISON OF EMPATHY FOR PAIN AND EMPATHY FOR FEAR IN ANTERIOR INSULA IN
EXTRAORDINARY ALTRUISTS
Kristin M. Brethel-Haurwitz – University of Pennsylvania; Elise M. Cardinale – Georgetown University; Kruti M. Vekaria
– Georgetown University; Emily L. Robertson – Louisiana State University; John W. VanMeter – Georgetown
University; Abigail A. Marsh – Georgetown University
The anterior insula (AI) is an integrative hub involved in processing both intra- and interpersonal emotions (Craig,
2009). Debate persists about the AI’s role in empathy for pain versus other emotions (Krishnan et al., 2016; CorradiDell’Acqua et al., 2016). The current study examined the AI’s role in empathy for fear versus pain in altruistic kidney
donors and matched controls. In a matched empathy-for-pain paradigm, cues indicated safety or potential painful
pressure to the right thumbnail, and pain cues were followed probabilistically by pressure. Participants watched a
stranger undergo the paradigm, then experienced it themselves. Neural responses to first-hand and vicarious fear
and pain were compared. Prior results showed that altruists have enhanced self-other correspondence in pain
processing in left AI. Examining fearful anticipation of pain in this paradigm revealed that altruists also have greater
bilateral AI self-other conjunction for fear. But, self-other covariation in left AI activation observed for pain was not
observed for fear, suggesting greater neural simulation for pain than fear in AI in altruists. Group differences in
functional connectivity of left AI during vicarious fear and pain were also explored, revealing both similarities
(posterior AI, striatum) and differences (amygdala during fear) in enhanced connectivity in altruists across the two
conditions. Higher activation in bilateral AI for pain than fear, both first-hand and vicarious, suggests that the AI may
respond to distress generally, especially in altruists, but is particularly pain sensitive. Together, these results suggest
both shared and distinct roles for AI in empathy for fear and pain.
B – 2 *SANS Poster Award winner*
ROUND-ROBIN NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF SELF AND OTHERS REVEAL MULTIVARIATE PATTERN
CONSENSUS IN INTERPERSONAL PERCEPTION
Robert Chavez – The Ohio State University; Dylan Wagner – The Ohio State University
A classic finding from research on interpersonal perception is that there is a high degree of correspondence between
a person’s self-reported ratings of their own traits and other’s ratings of that person’s traits. This is particularly robust
when aggregating across a group of familiar acquaintances, each of whom may know the target in a slightly different

	

57

way. If aggregated knowledge of familiar individuals increases the similarity between how people view themselves
and how others view them, how might patterns of neural activity reflect this consensus? We investigated this
question in a close-knit social network using a full round-robin design in which each participant was both the
perceiver and a target for every other participant in the study. Neural responses to self and others were measured
using functional magnetic resonance imaging while participants completed a round-robin version of a standard
self/other trait-judgment task. Our results show that multi-voxel response patterns in the medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) during self-referential processing are predicted by corresponding neural responses to perceptions of that
same target when aggregated across individuals within their social network. Moreover, this neural self-other
consensus in pattern similarity was associated with self-other consensus in trait judgments when measured
behaviorally in a separate session. Taken together, these results demonstrate that agreement in self-other
personality judgement reflects group-level consensus in patterns of neural responses to a given target within one’s
social network. These results further underscore the finding that person knowledge is supported by multivariate
patterns of activity in the MPFC.
B – 3 *SANS Poster Award winner*
DECISION-CONFLICT IN THE TEMPORAL DISCOUNTING TASK: MIDFRONTAL THETA AND PUPIL
DILATION TRACK SUBJECTIVE CONFLICT IN VALUE-BASED DECISIONS
Hause Lin – University of Toronto; Blair Saunders – University of Toronto; Cendri A. Hutcherson – University of
Toronto; Michael Inzlicht – University of Toronto
People often experience decision conflict when choosing between competing options or responses, for example when
deciding between a healthy yet bland snack versus an unhealthy but tasty one. Theta band neural oscillations (4–8
Hz) over the midfrontal cortex have been linked to objective conflict processing during cognitive control tasks (e.g.,
incongruent/high-conflict vs. congruent/low-conflict stimuli on Stroop task). Here we ask whether midfrontal theta
also tracks subjective conflict, such as during value-guided decisions. We also test whether theta reflects conflict in a
binary fashion or if it is sensitive to parametric changes in conflict. We further ask if pupil dilation—also associated
with objective conflict processing—tracks subjective conflict. To manipulate subjective conflict, participants performed
an intertemporal choice task. We parametrically varied the amount of conflict in different choice pairs by asking
participants to choose between immediate ($15 today) and participant-specific delayed rewards (e.g., $19.23 in 10
days), which were generated based on each participant's idiosyncratic hyperbolic discount function. We observe
strongest midfrontal theta power and largest pupil dilation when the immediate and delayed rewards are equally
desirable (i.e., most conflicting choice). Crucially, both signals reflect different gradations of conflict: As one reward
becomes increasingly more desirable than the other, theta power and pupil dilation decrease. We therefore provide
evidence for neurophysiological signals that compare subjective values and reflect indecision. Midfrontal theta and
pupil dilation may be relevant for understanding not just the neural implementations of value-based decision
processes, but also phenomena such as attitudinal ambivalence.
B – 4 *SANS Poster Award winner*
AUTOMATIC STEREOTYPE ACTIVATION IN THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE
Ryan M. Stolier – New York University; Jonathan B. Freeman – New York University
The automatic activation of stereotypes in response to other people is a central tenet in numerous models of social
cognition. Despite an extensive behavioral literature examining this process, there is currently a lack of evidence for
automatic stereotype activation in a context without task demands, and little understanding of its neural substrates.
In this study, we sought evidence for the presence of race-based stereotype activation as participants passively
viewed faces of category exemplars or mere race-category labels. In a series of ostensibly unrelated tasks during
fMRI, participants first passively viewed Black and Asian stereotype traits (equated on valence), and subsequently
faces and labels of the Black and Asian categories. In a searchlight procedure, we trained a classifier to distinguish
voxel patterns of Asian and Black stereotypes, then tested where we could discriminate social categories (faces,
labels) based upon their corresponding stereotype patterns. This analysis found that stereotype trait patterns could
discriminate between target categories during face or label viewing in the left anterior temporal lobe (lATL). These
results suggest that, when viewing a Black or Asian face or label, related stereotype traits were automatically
activated and represented in the lATL. The findings implicate the lATL, often associated with the storage and retrieval
of semantic associations and social concept representation, in representing associated stereotype information
automatically during the perception and thought of social categories. This finding substantiates a core assumption of
models of stereotyping and person perception and furthers our understanding of the lATL in social cognition.
B–5
SUPPRESSING THE ENDOCRINE AND AUTONOMIC STRESS SYSTEMS DOES NOT IMPACT THE
EMOTIONAL STRESS EXPERIENCE AFTER PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS
Nida Ali – McGill University; Jonas P. Nitschke – McGill University; Cory Cooperman – McGill University; Jens C.

	58

Pruessner – McGill University
Acute psychosocial stress activates the physiological and endocrine stress systems and increases the subjective
emotional experience of stress. While considerable efforts have been made to link changes in the activity of the
biological stress systems with changes in the emotional experience of stress, results so far have been mixed, at best.
To investigate this association experimentally, we pharmacologically suppressed both the autonomic and the
endocrine stress responses, and investigated the effects of acute psychosocial stress on the emotional stress
experience. 46 healthy men and women received dexamethasone (2 mg) or placebo the day before, and propranolol
(80 mg) or placebo one hour before psychosocial stress induction. Salivary cortisol, alpha-amylase and heart-rate
responses were assessed before, during and after stress induction. Subjective stress, mood, and state self-esteem
assessments were made before and after stress. In the pharmacological manipulation group, subjects demonstrated
no increase in autonomic or endocrine stress response, after exposure to psychosocial stress. Despite these effects,
the emotional stress experience was intact in this group and identical to the control group. Participants in the
experimental group reported increased subjective stress, mood dysregulation, and lower state self-esteem following
stress exposure, with the response magnitude comparable to the control group. Our findings demonstrate that during
acute stress, the physiological stress arousal systems and the emotional experience of stress are dissociated. This
raises important questions about the efficacy of our measurement of subjective stress, and the unique contributions
of the autonomic and endocrine responses in the subjective stress experience.
B–6
TRUMP VERSUS CLINTON: THE ROLE OF MORAL INTUITION NETWORKS IN PROCESSING POLITICAL
ATTACK ADVERTISEMENTS
Ori Amir – University of California, Santa Barbara; Richard Huskey – The Ohio State University; James Michael
Mangus – University of California, Santa Barbara; Reid Swanson – University of Southern California; Andrew Gordon
– University of Southern California; Peter Khooshabeh – US Army Research Laboratory; Rene Weber – University of
California, Santa Barbara
The Model of Intuitive Morality and Exemplars (MIME; Tamborini, 2012) builds on moral foundation theory (MFT,
Haidt, 2001) to predict the attitudinal and behavioral effects of mass-media messages. Many of the MIME's
predictions have been supported in behavioral studies, yet neuroscientific research on how specific networks in the
brain are recruited to process messages' moral content is lacking. Here we use political advertisements as a test case
for understanding the neurocognitive processes underlying MFT and the MIME. Recent research using a moral
intuitionist perspective (Graham et al., 2009, 2012) suggests that liberals’ morality fixates on “individualizing” moral
concerns (i.e., on care, fairness, liberty). In contrast, conservatives tend to consider a wider spectrum of moral
foundations, supplementing the individualizing foundations with additional “binding” moral concerns (loyalty,
authority, sanctity-purity). A total of 60 participants (20 self-identified Democrats, Republicans, and Unaffiliated; 50%
women) underwent fMRI. Participants first engaged in a validated moral intuition localizer task (Clifford et al., 2015)
and subsequently evaluated 22 political Trump/Clinton attack ads used in the US 2016 presidential campaign.
Preliminary analyses suggest that within localized moral intuition networks, participants of all political affiliations
show greater activation for attack ads against Clinton relative to attack ads against Trump. In specific networks - for
instance within the DMPFC - first results hint to an interaction between type of attack ad, political affiliation, and sex.
Additional analyses presented at the SANS conference will reveal whether activation patterns in moral intuition
networks can be used to predict ad perceptions and candidate preferences.
B–7
NEGATIVITY SPREADS SOCIALLY: NEGATIVITY BIAS IN OPINION CHANGE IS ASSOCIATED WITH
ACTIVITY IN THE BRAIN’S MENTALIZING SYSTEM
Elisa C. Baek – University of Pennsylvania; Christin Scholz – University of Pennsylvania; Matthew Brook O'Donnell –
University of Pennsylvania; Emily B. Falk – University of Pennsylvania
Humans constantly share and receive recommendations with one another, yet little is known about how the valence
(i.e., positivity or negativity) of recommendations influence the neurocognitive processes involved in the propagation
of opinions. We used neuroimaging and natural language classifiers to test how valence of online recommendations
can propagate, leading to opinion change. Recommendations higher in negativity were more influential in engaging
processes in the brain associated with taking the perspective of others (i.e., ‘mentalizing’), including subregions in
MMPFC, DMPFC, bilateral TPJ, PC/PCC, and MTG, but not within limbic regions implicated in processing lower level
affect, including the bilateral amygdala and ventral striatum. Further, increased neural activity in both amygdala and
mentalizing systems were significant predictors of negative opinion change in the recipient. Broadly, these results
highlight the importance of both lower level brain systems traditionally implicated in processing stimulus salience, as
well as higher level cognitive systems implicated in understanding others’ minds in opinion change. These results
further provide new insight into how negative information spreads and the underlying psychological and
neurocognitive processes involved.

	

59

B–8
IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT VISUAL PERSPECTIVE TAKING AS MEASURED BY FAST PERIODIC VISUAL
STIMULATION (FPVS)
Alexy A. Beck – University of Louvain; Bruno Rossion – University of Louvain; Dana Samson – University of Louvain
The fast periodic visual stimulation (FPVS) approach has been successfully used to explore low-level vision, spatial
and selective attention, and recently face perception. We extended the FPVS approach to explore social cognitive
processing level i.e., the processes underpinning our ability to compute explicitly versus implicitly what is seen by
someone else. We presented stimuli at a rapid rate of 2.5 images/second (2.5 Hz). All stimuli represented a human
avatar (whose identity varied) in a room with an object on one of the walls. The identity and location of the object
changed at each stimulation cycle. We presented 4 consecutive stimuli in which both, the participant and the avatar
saw the object on the wall, while every 5th image showed a stimulus for which only the participant could see the
object. In one condition, participants were asked to explicitly take the other person’s perspective. In the other
condition, participants were asked to make a judgment unrelated to perspective taking (implicit perspective-taking
condition). We identified brain responses at exactly 0.5 Hz (2.5 Hz/5) which represents a clear visual perspective
discrimination response between an object seen/unseen by the other person. We found that the brain response was
stronger and more widespread across the scalp in the explicit compared to the implicit condition. Furthermore, there
was no specific activation in the implicit condition compared to the explicit condition. Overall the results suggest that
implicit perspective taking recruits the same processes as explicit perspective taking but that additional processes are
recruited in the latter case.
B–9
DIFFERENTIAL DEVELOPMENTAL IMPACTS OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT ON SYSTEMS ENGAGED IN TASK
PERFORMANCE AND EMOTIONAL RESPONDING
Karina S. Blair – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Joseph Aloi – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Harma
Meffert – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Stuart White – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Laura
Thornton – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Patrick Taylor – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Alita
Mobley – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Anna Erway – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Kayla Pope –
Boys Town National Research Hospital; R. James Blair – Boys Town National Research Hospital
Exposure to prior maltreatment has been associated with detrimental developmental impacts. However, there have
been recent suggestions that a differentiation should be made between the developmental impact of two different
forms of maltreatment: abuse (physical, emotional and sexual) and neglect (physical and emotional). Abuse has been
widely associated with increased threat responsiveness but the impact of neglect, and whether this is selective, is
rather less clear. In this study, youth in a residential care facility and the surrounding community (N=117) who had
experienced varying levels of prior maltreatment performed the affective Stroop task during fMRI. Increasing levels
of prior abuse were associated with specific disruptions in the recruitment of regions implicated in subjective value
representation including the amygdala, ventromedial frontal cortex and posterior cingulate cortex during task trials.
In contrast, increasing levels of neglect were associated with a specific disruption in recruitment of bilateral regions
of a relatively superior region of anterior insula cortex implicated in attentional processing in the context of
threatening distracters. These data demonstrate the adverse developmental impacts of both abuse and neglect and
reveal their developmental specificity for systems engaged in task performance and emotional responding.
B – 10
EMPATHIC MODULATION AS A FUNCTION OF COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL AND FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
Karina C. Borja-Jimenez – Netherlands Institute for Neurosciences; Walter C. Williams – Stanford University; Jamil
Zaki – Stanford University; Christian Keysers – Netherlands Institute for Neurosciences; Valeria Gazzola – Netherlands
Institute for Neurosciences
Our ability to share the feelings of others can be tracked at the behavioral and at the neural level. However, we
might feel empathy but not show it, or we can show empathy without necessarily ‘feeling’ it depending on our goals
and social context. To capture this potential dissociation at the neural level, we asked participants to regulate their
feelings or expressions of empathy during the observation of empathy eliciting images. Twenty-five young adults
completed a functional magnetic imaging (fMRI) session with the false-belief that their facial responses were being
recorded and assessed for legitimacy, and that their brain activity would be used to determine how well they
modulated their feelings. We then compared brain activity during trials in which participants were modulating their
facial expressions with that while modulating their feelings. Although a substantial network of brain regions was
common to all forms of regulation, we identified two networks that were differentially involved. One network around
the caudate was more involved in regulating feelings, and this was particularly active when participants were asked
to up-regulate their feelings towards the emotions of others. The other network around the mid temporal and inferior
frontal gyrus was more active while participants modulated their facial expressions, particularly towards
comparatively neutral social stimuli. These results emphasize the importance to look at empathy and its facial

	60

expressions as a motivated process, that participants can finely regulate by using partially distinct neural substrates
to influence their feelings and social signalling (in forms of facial expressions), respectively.
B – 11
SOCIAL INFLUENCE ON ADOLESCENT AMBIGUOUS AND RISKY DECISION-MAKING
Barbara R. Braams – Harvard University; Juliet Y. Davidow – Harvard University; Leah H. Somerville – Harvard
University
Adolescence is a life period associated with an increase in risk-taking behavior, especially in the context of peers.
Risk-taking behavior can be expressed in many ways, such as drinking alcohol, reckless driving and risky sexual
behavior. Two factors that are important for the propensity for risk-taking are attitudes towards ambiguity and risk.
Ambiguity refers to decisions with unknown probabilities of outcome whereas risk is defined as decisions with known
probabilities of outcome. Based on two recent studies, it appears that adolescents are more tolerant for ambiguity
than adults (Tymula et al., 2012; Blankenstein et al., 2016). A critical question that remains unanswered is how the
social context shapes risk-taking behavior in adolescence in risky and ambiguous decisions. In the current study we
used an economic choice task to establish the effect of social context on risky and ambiguous economic decisions.
Participants made a series of decisions between a safer and a riskier gamble. Decisions are made in two contexts, a
solo context and a social context in which participants are informed about other participants’ choices. Most real life
decisions are ambiguous and we therefore hypothesize that adolescents are especially influenced by social context
when making ambiguous decisions.
B – 12
AGE AND THE ROLE OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION IN PERSPECTIVE-TAKING
Victoria EA Brunsdon – University of Kent; Elisabeth EF Bradford – University of Kent; Heather J. Ferguson –
University of Kent
It has been suggested that, as we age, it is more difficult to take another person’s perspective. In addition, an agerelated decline in executive function has been reported. This study therefore investigated the age-related differences
in perspective-taking and whether executive function may underlie reduced perspective-taking ability in older age.
Younger, middle-aged and older adults completed a level-1 visual perspective-taking task (with eye-tracking), and a
battery of executive function tasks to assess memory, planning, flexibility and inhibitory control. Older adults had
poorer inhibitory control, flexibility, and working memory, but comparable planning ability, compared to younger
adults. Reaction times in the visual perspective-taking task significantly increased from young, to middle-aged, to
older adults. In addition, older adults were impaired when judging another’s perspective when their own perspective
differed, indicating a higher degree of egocentric bias in older adults. Statistical models examined how visual
perspective-taking ability is related to individual differences in executive function across adulthood. Overall, there is a
specific impairment in taking another’s perspective when there is interference from our own perspective in late
adulthood. This study therefore discusses how the decline in executive function may underlie difficulties in taking
another’s perspective in later life.
B – 13
TRAIT ANXIETY INFLUENCES SPONTANEOUS EMOTION REGULATION
Daisy A. Burr – Dartmouth College; Alison M. Mattek – Dartmouth College; Tracy C. d'Arbeloff – Dartmouth College;
Paul J. Whalen – Dartmouth College
The ability to regulate emotion is an adaptive skill that fosters resilience. Much research has investigated the
mechanisms and efficacy of instructed emotion regulation techniques such as cognitive reappraisal and suppression.
This study aims to bridge the gap between instructed and spontaneous regulation by investigating individual
differences associated with voluntarily choosing to regulate and the selected technique. Specifically, we examine the
relationships among choice to regulate, preferred regulation technique, and trait personality differences. Participants
(N=30) viewed negatively valenced IAPS images with no explicit regulation instructions and answered free-response
questions that assessed what regulation techniques, if any, they spontaneously employed. Descriptively, 40% of the
participants spontaneously reported using positive reappraisal, with females using positive reappraisal more
frequently than males (58% of females; 11% of males). Participants endorsed other techniques as follows: negative
reappraisal (30%), suppression (23%), gaze aversion (13%), and no regulation strategy (16%). In terms of our
focus on trait anxiety, those who are more trait anxious are more likely to endorse suppression as a regulation
technique (r(28)=-.37, p=.04). These data represent an initial exploration of spontaneous emotion regulation choices
and their interactions with personality traits. To follow up, a new group of participants will view negatively valenced
IAPS images in an fMRI scanner while regulating according to the strategies selected based upon these behavioral
data.

	

61

B – 14
LOOKING THE PART (TO ME): EFFECTS OF RACIAL PROTOTYPICALITY ON RACE PERCEPTION VARY BY
PREJUDICE
Brittany S. Cassidy – Indiana University Bloomington; Gregory T. Sprout – Indiana University Bloomington; Jonathan
B. Freeman – New York University; Anne C. Krendl – Indiana University Bloomington
Less racially prototypic faces elicit more category competition during race categorization. Top-down factors (e.g.,
stereotypes), however, affect categorizations, suggesting racial prototypicality may enhance category competition in
certain perceivers. Because individuals with higher levels of prejudice have more stereotypic visualizations of ethnic
minorities, we examined how prejudice affects race category competition and stabilization when perceiving faces
varying in racial prototypicality. When analyzing the motor trajectories of 194 White perceivers (Experiment 1),
prototypically low versus high Black relative to White faces elicited more category competition and slower response
latencies during categorizations, suggesting a pronounced racial prototypicality effect on minority race categorization.
However, more prejudice predicted the increased category competition between prototypically low versus high Black
faces. Suggesting a potential response conflict mechanism engaging more toward prototypically decreasing Black
versus White faces, fMRI data from 30 White perceivers (Experiment 2) showed increased anterior cingulate cortex
activity toward Black over White faces as faces decreased in racial prototypicality. Critically, prejudice positively
predicted the extent of the racial prototypicality effect elicited in anterior cingulate activity. These findings extend the
literatures on racial prototypicality and categorization by showing that relative prejudice tempers the extent of
category competition and response conflict engaged when initially perceiving racial outgroup faces.
B – 15
ADOLESCENTS’ BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL RESPONSES TO E-CIGARETTE ADVERTISING
Yvonnes Chen – University of Kansas; Carina H. Fowler – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Vlad B. Papa –
University of Kansas Medical Center; Rebecca J. Lepping – University of Kansas Medical Center; Morgan G. Brucks –
University of Kansas Medical Center; Andrew T. Fox – University of Kansas Medical Center; Laura E. Martin –
University of Kansas Medical Center
Although adolescents are a group heavily targeted by the e-cigarette industry, research in cue-reactivity has not
previously examined adolescents’ behavioral and neural responses to e-cigarette advertising. This study addresses
this gap through two experiments. In Experiment One, adult smokers (n=42) and nonsmokers (n=42) answered
questions about e-cigarette and neutral advertising images. The 40 e-cigarette advertising images that most
increased desire to smoke were matched to 40 neutral advertising images with similar content. In Experiment Two,
the 80 advertising images selected in Experiment One were presented to adolescents of different smoking statuses (n
= 30) during an fMRI brain scan. While only adolescent smokers self-reported that viewing the e-cigarette
advertising images increased their desire to smoke, all participants showed significantly greater brain activation to ecigarette advertisements in areas associated with cognitive control (left middle frontal gyrus), reward (right medial
frontal gyrus), visual/attention (left lingual gyrus/fusiform gyrus, right inferior parietal lobule, left posterior cingulate,
left angular gyrus), and memory (right parahippocampus, left insula). Further, adolescent smokers displayed
significantly greater neural activation in response to e-cigarette versus neutral advertising images in the left inferior
temporal gyrus/fusiform gyrus. Overall, neural responses to e-cigarette advertisements among adolescent smokers
and nonsmokers suggest that e-cigarette advertising is particularly appealing to adolescents and may undermine
efforts to control and reduce tobacco use in this group.
B – 16
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL SUBSTRATES OF DECISION-MAKING UNDER SOCIAL INFLUENCE IN
SUBSTANCE USERS
Dongil Chung – Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute; Brooks King-Casas – Virginia Tech Carilion Research
Institute; George I. Christopoulos – Nanyang Technological University; Thomas Newton – Baylor College of Medicine
& Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center; Richard De La Garza – Baylor College of Medicine & Michael E. DeBakey VA
Medical Center; Pearl H. Chiu – Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute
Previous studies have highlighted the impact of social influence on preferences, especially under conditions of
uncertainty. Social influence is of particular interest for substance-abusing individuals, since social factors are
prominent influences on first use and relapse. The aim of the current study is to examine mechanisms of decisionmaking among social others, with a focus on how substance use affects decision-making where social and non-social
information coexist. Thirty-two male cocaine dependent individuals and thirty matched controls participated in the
current study. Participants made a series of forced choices between two gambles (one “risky” and one “safe”), alone
and after viewing other players’ decisions. Blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) responses during the presentation
of others’ choices were measured and analyzed. Using model-based fMRI analyses, this work shows that biased
perceptions of risk probability contribute to cocaine dependent individuals’ decisions under social influence. This bias
was observed only among individuals with cocaine use disorder, and trial-by-trial subjective value adjusted by the

	62

probability bias was parametrically correlated with vmPFC activity. We will discuss the implications of these data for
understanding social influences on decision making in adolescents at risk for substance use disorders. Together,
these data provide a neuromechanistic account of how social and non-social information are integrated and how
these processes may be affected in substance users.
B – 17
INFORMATION INTEGRATION IN ECONOMIC VALUE JUDGMENTS: SHIFT FROM AFFECTIVE TO
DELIBERATIVE DECISION NETWORK REGIONS
Lindsay Conner – University of Central Florida; Ian Dalton – University of Central Florida; Marilyn Horta – University
of Florida; Desiree Gulliford – University of Florida; Ian Frazier – University of Florida; Natalie Ebner – University of
Florida; Nichole Lighthall – University of Central Florida
Previous research indicates that two processing systems support decision making – the automatic/affective system
and the controlled/deliberative system (e.g., Kahneman, 2003; Sanfey & Chang, 2008). Memory-based value
judgments may depend on both systems, but it is presently unclear if one system is ideally suited to support
judgments that rely on integrating recently learned affective information. The present fMRI study examined
involvement of these two neural systems for value judgments requiring either simple retrieval of previously learned
affective information or retrieval with information integration. Stimuli included product images with consumer review
excerpts from an online shopping website. First, participants rated the emotional valence of consumer reviews.
Products were presented with a single consumer review or with two different reviews on non-consecutive trials.
Then, participants estimated the average consumer rating for each product the consumer reviews presented.
Judgment accuracy was determined from the similarity between participants’ average valence rating(s) for review
comments and their estimations of the average consumer rating for each product. Results indicated that value
judgments requiring information integration were associated with greater involvement of deliberative processing
regions (e.g., dorsal attention and executive control regions) compared with judgments requiring simple memory
retrieval. In contrast, a region in the affective network (vmPFC) supported high-accuracy judgments to a greater
extent in the simple retrieval versus integration condition. These results suggest that when judgment-relevant past
experiences are limited, retrieval of one additional piece of information can cause a shift in the effective decision
network from ventral affective regions to dorsal executive control regions.
B – 18
YIELDING TO SOCIAL SUPPORT CORRESPONDS WITH DIMINISHED NEURAL RESPONSE TO SOCIAL
THREAT WHILE ALONE
Andrea M. Coppola – University of Virginia; Marlen Z. Gonzalez – University of Virginia; James A. Coan – University of
Virginia
Holding hands with a supportive partner is associated with attenuated neural response to threat of electric shock
(Coan et al., 2006). The degree of attenuation varies by individual, but these individual differences are not well
characterized. We speculate that the ability to benefit neurally from social support may be dispositional, in that it
may be relatively stable across time and co-vary with other trait-like individual differences. In this study, we
investigated whether the degree of social context dependent attenuation in threat-related neural activity (an effect
we call “yielding”) can predict neural response during a subsequent social exclusion task. Based on previous findings,
we selected two regions of interest, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
(dACC). We operationalized yielding as the difference between activation during the alone and partner conditions in
those regions (with a greater difference indicating more yielding). 76 participants underwent fMRI while alone,
holding hands with a stranger, and holding hands with a partner during threat of shock. All participants then
completed a social exclusion task while fMRI data was collected. We observed that higher yielding in the dlPFC and
dACC during the handholding task corresponded with decreased activity during social exclusion in the lateral occipital
cortex, precuneus, right dlPFC, vmPFC, and superior parietal lobule (cluster-extent corrected: Z = 2.58, p = 0.05).
These results suggest 1) that yielding may vary in trait-like ways across individuals, and 2) that yielding may co-vary
with sensitivity to, and self-regulation during, the threat of social exclusion.
B – 19
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF PERSON EVALUATION BASED ON PERSON-KNOWLEDGE
Tzipporah P. Dang – University of Chicago; Jasmin Cloutier – University of Chicago; Jennifer T. Kubota – University of
Chicago
Person evaluation can be based on perceptually available characteristics, such as attractiveness, or on knowledge
specific to a person, such as their accomplishments. In the current event-related fMRI experiment, we aimed to
identify neural substrates supporting evaluative judgments based on either perceptual characteristics or personknowledge. To do so, we asked participants to perform attractiveness and likability based on body of work judgments
on familiar faces (i.e., actors) and attractiveness judgments on unfamiliar faces (i.e., models). The results from 45

	

63

white, male participants reveal preferential neural activation in vmPFC during person evaluations based on personknowledge in contrast to evaluations based on perceptual characteristics for both familiar and novel individuals. From
these results, we discuss the implications for our understanding of the extended brain networks involved in person
perception and elaborate on the differences between person evaluations of targets based on prior knowledge and
impressions based on perceptual cues alone.
B – 20
“NOTHING IS FOREVER”, IS THIS A HAPPY ENDING? NEURAL CORRELATES OF INTEROCEPTION AND
MINDFUL ATTENTION
Sarah De Coninck – Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Elien Heleven – Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Frank Van Overwalle – Vrije
Universiteit Brussel; Peter Mariën – Vrije Universiteit Brussel & ZNA Middelheim
Many studies have explored the neural correlates and emotional effects of mindfulness, but they rarely focused on its
subcomponents and their effectiveness. This study investigates two components of a short mindfulness training:
interoception (turning attention to bodily sensations) and mindful attention (observing these bodily sensations as
transient mental events). Moreover, we took into account mindful disposition. All study participants (n=32) were
trained in three emotion processing strategies: 1) immersion (control condition), 2) interoception alone and 3)
mindful attention of interoceptive sensations. In the fMRI scanner participants viewed negative pictures while
applying the strategies. After each picture, they rated subjective valence and arousal. Participants felt the most
positive and least aroused in the mindful attention condition. The left amygdala was more active in the interoception
condition compared to both the immersion and the mindful attention condition. Several other clusters of the
mentalizing network showed a linear trend, being progressively more active in the interoception condition and the
most in the mindful attention condition, compared to the immersion condition. In addition, the relationship between
the conditions while applying the strategies and activity in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) and the insula
was attenuated by mindful disposition. Taken together, the behavioral and neuroimaging data suggest that mindful
attention adds to the beneficial effects of an interoceptive focus. Moreover, neural activation while applying the
strategies, is modulated by mindful disposition.
B – 21
SMALLER AMYGDALA VOLUME AND INCREASED NEUROTICISM PREDICT ANXIETY, BUT NOT
DEPRESSION SYMPTOMS, IN HEALTHY SUBJECTS: A VOLUMETRIC APPROACH USING MANUAL
TRACING
Sanda Dolcos – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Yifan Hu – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign;
Zachariah Bertels – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Benjamin Olivari – University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign; Audra Chaves – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Matthew Moore – University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign; Florin Dolcos – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Volumetric changes in the amygdala have been identified in affective disorders, and also in nonclinical populations
with high anxiety and depression scores. However, the reported patterns of change (increase or decrease) have not
been consistent in the literature, likely due to the employment of different methods to determine the amygdala
volume (i.e., manual tracing, in psychiatric research vs. automated methods, in non-clinical research). Here, we
employed precise assessments of amygdala volume using manual tracing, and examined a possible mediating role of
neuroticism (a personality risk factor linked to vulnerability to affective disorders and associated with altered
amygdala volume) in the relationship between amygdala and symptoms of affective dysregulation (anxiety and
depression). Fifty-seven healthy participants underwent anatomical MRI scanning and completed questionnaires
measuring neuroticism, anxiety, and depression. Our investigation yielded two main findings. First, smaller amygdala
volume was linked to higher levels of neuroticism and trait anxiety. Second, neuroticism mediated the relationship
between amygdala volume and trait anxiety. Importantly, these findings were specific to anxiety, as similar
relationships were not identified for depression. Collectively, these findings advance our understanding of
associations between amygdala volume and symptoms of affective dysregulation, and provide insight into
dissociations among the related theoretical constructs of neuroticism, anxiety, and depression. These findings also
provide support for a brain-personality-symptom framework of understanding affective dysregulation, which may
help inform the development of prevention and intervention paradigms targeting preservation of amygdala volume
and reduction of neuroticism, to protect against anxiety symptoms.
B – 22
AFFECTIVE MODULATION OF VISUAL PERCEPTION
Stephanie Dubal – ICM (Brain and Spine Institute); Mariam Chammat – ICM; Gwladys Rey – Geneva University;
Kenneth Knoblauch – Stem-Cell and Brain Research Institute
We will present a series of experiments designed to explore how physical and affective properties interact in visual
perception. We used a conjoint measurement model that allows the assessment of separate contributions of two (or

	64

more) attributes to perceived differences in stimuli. Emotional and contrast levels of natural scenes were scaled to
assess how judgment along one dimension is influenced by the level of the other. In a given session, observers
judged either which image was of higher contrast or of higher emotion. Judgments were analyzed using Maximum
Likelihood Conjoint Measurement (MLCM) the aim of which is to estimate scale values, whose additive combination
best captures the observer’s judgments of the perceptual difference between the stimuli in each pair. The results
show that the contrast level and emotion level interact in determining perceived contrast but also that the
contribution of emotion to contrast perception is additive. fMRI data further illustrate that emotion contribution to
visual appearance occurs in the early visual cortex, and EEG data points out an early contribution around 100 ms
post stimulus onset. Thus, the physical appearance of a stimulus is modulated by its affective content.
B – 23
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF LEARNING A SOCIAL NETWORK
Sarah L. Dziura – George Mason University; James C. Thompson – George Mason University
Social functioning involves learning about the social networks in which we live; knowing not just our friends, but also
about friends of our friends. In this study, we examined how we learn and represent these social relationships, using
fMRI. Participants (N = 22) first implicitly learned the structure of two social networks by making arbitrary personality
comparisons between pairs of network members, where the frequency of pair presentation reflected closeness within
the network. Participants then reported network connections and closeness of each pair (d' = 1.2; correlation
between true and reported network closeness mean r = 0.54, sd = 0.21). In a subsequent fMRI scanning session,
participants were shown each face and 12 novel faces for one second in random order and detected repeats.
Searchlight-based Representation Similarity Analysis (RSA) revealed that the accuracy of social network learning
correlated with neural pattern similarity between faces in left temporoparietal junction and subcallosal cingulate (p <
0.05, permutation test, threshold-free cluster enhancement correction). That is, the closer the participants’ recall of
the closeness of each pair was to true network closeness, the more similar the neural patterns between each face
pair. These findings indicate that these areas of the social brain not only process knowledge and understanding of
others, but also support learning relations between individuals in groups.
B – 24
ARE YOU LOOKING AT ME? MU SUPPRESSION MODULATION BY FACIAL EXPRESSION DIRECTION
Noga S. Ensenberg – The Hebrew University of Jerusalem; Anat Perry – University of California; Hillel Aviezer –The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Imagine you are walking down the street while encountering a stranger yelling angrily at you. Now imagine a similar
situation with the stranger yelling at the person walking right beside you. Undeniably, the subjective experience of
being the target of one’s expression greatly differs yet the neural mechanisms underlying this distinction are largely
unknown. Simulation Theory proposes that we understand others’ minds by simulating their actions, possibly via
mirror neurons (MNs), but is this system sensitive to the degree of social interaction and dynamic engagement? We
measured EEG Mu rhythms’ suppression as a manifestation of MNs activity while participants viewed video clips of
dynamic facial expressions. Critically, the videos portrayed facial emotions which turned towards or away from the
viewer, thus manipulating their degree of social relevance. Mirroring activity increased as a function of social
relevance such that expressions turning toward the viewer resulted in increased sensorimotor activation (i.e.,
stronger mu suppression) compared to identical expressions turning away from the viewer. Additional analyses
confirmed that expressions turning toward the viewer were perceived as more relevant and engaging than
expressions turning away from the viewer, a finding not explained by perceived intensity or recognition accuracy.
Mirror sensorimotor mechanisms may play a key role in determining the relevance of perceived facial expressions.
B – 25
READING POETRY INCREASES ADULTS’ EMPATHETIC TRAITS AND MODERATES PHYSIOLOGICAL
AROUSAL
Giulio Gabrieli – University of Trento; Mengyu Lim – Nanyang Technological University; Chiara Bolcato – University of
Trento; Anna Truzzi – University of Trento & Brain Science Institute, RIKEN; Paola Rigo – Nanyang Technological
University; Luca Onnis – Nanyang Technological University; Gianluca Esposito – University of Trento & Nanyang
Technological University
Empathic abilities can be promoted by reading literary fiction, since understanding fictional narrative requires more
authors’ intentions interpretation than journalistic or academic writing. Here, we aimed to investigate whether
reading a poem, which involves higher levels of interpretation than prose, increases trait empathy levels. In Study 1,
70 adults (Italy=30,Singapore=40) read either a poem or a non-poem over the same topic (family bonding). Trait
empathy levels were measured before and after text presentation through self-reported questionnaires, while ECG
recordings were taken during text presentation. To rule out attention modulation, in Study 2 EEG measurements
were recorded from 45 participants (Italy=16,Singapore=24) who read both the poem and the non-poem. In both

	

65

studies participants’ literary knowledge was assessed using the Authors’ Recognition Test. Results from Study 1
indicate that the poem increases empathy trait levels, especially in individuals with a lower empathetic baseline, and
physiological arousal, as highlighted by increased low frequencies and decreased variability in participants’ heart rate,
compared to the non-poem. EEG measurements revealed that the poem’s effect was not due to attentional
modulation since no difference in frontal areas’ gamma waves was found. Rather, poem reading enhanced
participants’ relaxation as highlighted by alpha activity increase. Same results were obtained in both Western and
Eastern populations, thus lending support to effects generalizability. Our findings suggest that reading poetry
engages measurable physiological aspects of emotion interpretation and perspective-taking. As such, poetry
exposure could be beneficial in helping people increase their empathetic behaviors.
B – 26
CONSTRUCTING GRATITUDE BY INTEGRATING SELF-BENEFIT AND OTHER-COST PROCESSING IN AN
INTERPERSONAL CONTEXT
Xiaoxue Gao – Peking University; Hongbo Yu – University of Oxford; Xiaolin Zhou – Peking University
There are two determinant of interpersonal gratitude: benefit to the beneficiary (i.e. self-benefit) and cost of the
benefactor (i.e. other-cost). However, it is unclear how the brain encodes and integrates these factors to give rise to
gratitude. In the current fMRI study, we parametrically manipulated self-benefit and other-cost in an interactive task
where a partner is given the choice to help participants avoid pain stimulation at his/her own cost. In each trial,
participants were informed about the level of pain they would receive and the amount of money the partner would
need to pay if he/she wished to cancel this pain stimulation. Then the partner’s decision (Help or Not Help) was
presented. After scanning, participants rated their gratitude for each condition. Self-benefit encoding was associated
with reward-related areas such as ventral striatum (VS), whereas other-cost encoding involved mentalizing-related
areas such as temporoparietal junction (TPJ). A regression model was used to separate the contributions of selfbenefit and other-cost to gratitude, in which the regression coefficients for these two predictors reflected individual
weight on self-benefit and other-cost in generating gratitude. To reveal the neural correlates underlying gratitude, we
derived an index for trial-by-trial gratitude (i.e. constructed gratitude) by multiplying these coefficients with selfbenefit and other-cost for each trial. The constructed gratitude positively correlated with signal in ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). Dynamic causal modeling suggested that vmPFC functioned as a central node for the
integration of self-benefit and other-cost. Our findings shed light on how the brain constructs gratitude in an
interpersonal context.
B – 27
DEVELOPMENTAL PATTERNS OF HOT AND COOL EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS IN CHILDREN
Joana Gonçalves – University of Porto; Fernando Barbosa – University of Porto
In the last years, the multidimensional construct of executive functioning has been conceptualized in two dimensions:
(1) the cool cognitive aspects more associated with dorsolateral regions of prefrontal cortex, and (2) the hot affective
aspects more associated with ventral and medial regions. This study examined the developmental patterns of both
hot and cool executive functions from preschool children up to adolescence. A total of 70 participants clustered into
seven age groups (5-6, 6-7, 7-8, 8-9, 9-10, 10-11, and 11-12) completed the Iowa Gambling Task for Children (IGT),
and 4 subtests included in the Neuropsychological Assessment Battery (NEPSY-II): Affect Recognition (AR), Theory of
Mind (TOM), Design Fluency (DF), and Auditory Attention (AA). Age-related improvements were found in all tasks,
except in the IGT, which can be explained by children`s “myopia for the future”, i.e., children`s insensitivity to future
consequences and hypersensitivity to reward, opting for choices that yield high immediate gains in spite of higher
future losses. Overall, the developmental pattern of cool executive functions was characterized by a rapid
development in early childhood with significant differences between the 5-6 and 6-7 age groups, reaching a plateau
approximately at 7-8 years, with only minor improvements after that. The hot executive functions presented an
inconsistent developmental pattern, punctuated by advances and regressions, suggesting a protracted development
possibly with improvements after adolescence. Partial correlations, controlling for age, showed significant
associations between performance on Hot and Cool EF tasks, suggesting that they work in concert and may rely on
the same mechanisms.
B – 28
THE ROLE OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVITY IN EXPLAINING GENDER DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION
REGULATION: EVIDENCE FROM TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION
K. Elise Goubet – University of Kansas; Evangelia G. Chrysikou – University of Kansas
Gender differences in emotion regulation (ER) is a topic that remains largely unexplored within the cognitive and
affective neuroscience literature. Previous research suggests that men and women regulate their emotions
differently, both with regards to the strategies they use to regulate emotional responses and the neural regions
associated with such regulation. For example, during a cognitive reappraisal task men exhibit lower increases in

	66

prefrontal cortex activity and greater decreases in amygdala activity than women. Interestingly, gender differences
do not necessarily characterize the effectiveness of ER processes. This suggests that men and women may engage in
ER following different strategies that involve different neural circuits. However, the precise neural mechanisms
underlying these differences are not fully understood. In this study, we examined gender differences in ER by using
anodal (excitatory), cathodal (inhibitory), or sham transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over the left
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) to investigate the effects of increased or decreased dlPFC excitability on
cognitive reappraisal as measured by subjective emotional arousal ratings and skin conductance responses. Our
results from both measures confirm past findings on gender differences in ER; they further suggest that these effects
have their origins in baseline differences in dlPFC activity between males and females, which can be causally
manipulated with tDCS. We discuss the implications of these results for theories of emotion regulation and dlPFC
function.
B – 29
INSTRUMENTAL SOCIAL LEARNING ACROSS CONTEXTS
Leor M. Hackel – Stanford University; Peter Mende-Siedlecki – University of Delaware; Karin Foerde – Columbia
University Medical Center; David M. Amodio – New York University
Human social relations take place in different contexts: a colleague who offers excellent advice in the office may
struggle to read emotions at a party. To navigate the social world, people must learn about these stable yet contextspecific characteristics of others. In a series of behavioral (combined N = 187) and functional MRI (N = 30)
experiments, we examined how people learn from probabilistic reward feedback and trait feedback during
instrumental social encounters in different contexts. Participants made choices to “hire” one of four partners who
answered verbal and math GRE questions to win points worth money. Partners were associated with different levels
of competence in verbal and math domains (defined as the proportion of available points partners earned), and
different levels of reward in each domain (defined as the number of points partners, and therefore participants,
earned). Computational modeling of behavior revealed that participants learned context-specific competencies
through instrumental feedback, and relied more heavily on this information during decision-making than on contextspecific rewards or global (cross-context) trait inferences of interaction partners. Competence prediction errors were
associated with BOLD signal in ventral striatum, as well as with regions previously implicated in social impression
updating (ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal lobule). Finally, when confronted with novel contexts,
participants flexibly generalized instrumentally-learned trait knowledge depending on similarity to original learning
contexts. These findings reveal a process whereby people form context-specific impressions, relying on neural
regions linked both to reward learning and single-context impression updating, and use this knowledge flexibly in
social decisions.
B – 30
OOH LA LA! THE SEXUAL RESPONSE IS A CANDIDATE BASIC EMOTION
Kate A. Hardwick – Macquarie University; Christian Keysers – Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences; Mark
A. Williams – Macquarie University
Pathogen disgust motivates behaviours geared toward avoiding disease threats and moral disgust motivates
behaviours that aid in avoiding moral transgressors. A third type of disgust has been identified, sexual disgust, which
motivates behaviours to avoid deleterious mating strategies. Discrete emotion theory suggests that each basic
emotion shows distinct physiological and behavioural responses, and sub-categories of a basic emotion should
typically share those responses. If these three types of disgust share avoidance strategies typical of the emotion
‘disgust,’ then humans should show similar responses in the same task. The emotional stroop task has been
successfully used to investigate the cognitive effects of emotionally charged words, where reaction times tend to
slow in response to emotional words compared with neutral words. We used the stroop paradigm to test the
hypothesis that reaction times would slow differentially in response to the three types of disgust. Participants were
presented with words in three disgust categories and two controls (one negative and one neutral) detecting the
colour of the ink in which the words were presented. The results show that participants were slower at detecting the
colour of words associated only with the sexual category. Additionally, a word recall task revealed that words
associated with the sexual category were remembered more than any other category. This research provides
evidence that ‘sexual’ as an emotion may be a candidate as a separate basic emotion in discrete emotion theory.
B – 31
CORE BODY TEMPERATURE MODERATES INTERGROUP BIAS IN FACE REPRESENTATIONS
Youngki Hong – University of California, Santa Barbara; Kyle G. Ratner – University of California, Santa Barbara
A recent study in our lab suggests that administration of acetaminophen, an antipyretic drug, to non-febrile
individuals results in blunted intergroup bias in face representation. This finding inspired us to investigate the
relationship between core body temperature and intergroup bias in face representations. In the current study, we

	

67

found that participants at the lower 20% of core body temperature distribution show less evaluative bias in mental
representations of minimally defined ingroup and outgroup faces compared to participants at the middle and upper
20% of the distribution. Specifically, ingroup and outgroup faces generated by participants with low body
temperature were evaluated equally on many positive and negative traits by the independent raters. In contrast,
ingroup faces were evaluated more favorably than outgroup faces among participants with middle and high body
temperature. The present work provides new insight into how physical warmth relates to intergroup bias.
B – 32
DIMINISHED SADNESS PHYSIOLOGICAL REACTIVITY IN SUBTYPES OF FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA
Alice Y. Hua – University of California, Berkeley; Sandy L. Lwi – University of California, Berkeley; James J. Casey –
University of California, Berkeley; Kuan-Hua Chen – University of California, Berkeley; Casey L. Brown – University of
California, Berkeley; Bruce L. Miller – University of California, San Francisco; Robert W. Levenson – University of
California, Berkeley
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to a group of neurodegenerative diseases that target the frontal and anterior
temporal lobes, regions that support emotion and social behavior. Previous work has focused on changes to
emotional functioning in behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), whereas few studies have examined emotional changes in
the language variants of FTD, including non-fluent primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA) and semantic variant
primary progressive aphasia (svPPA). We assessed sadness reactivity in patients with bvFTD, nfvPPA, svPPA, and
healthy controls (n = 25 in each group). Participants viewed a film clip that elicited sadness while peripheral
physiology was recorded. Participants were asked about their subjective emotional experience after viewing the film
clip, and emotional facial behavior was recorded and coded throughout the film with the Facial Action Coding System
(FACS). Analyses (controlling for sex, age, disease severity, medication) revealed a main effect of diagnosis for
physiological reactivity to the sad film (p <.001). No main effect of diagnosis was found for subjective emotional
experience or emotional facial behavior. Follow-up analyses revealed that patients with bvFTD, nfvPPA, and svPPA
had lower physiological reactivity compared to healthy controls. These findings suggest that reactivity for sadness is
altered in all FTD subtypes (including language variants), likely due to atrophy in emotion-relevant neural systems
that support a physiological response to sadness.
B – 33
COGNITIVE CONTROL ALLOCATION IS MODULATED BY LEVEL OF INTRINSIC REWARD: RESULTS FROM
THREE BEHAVIORAL AND ONE FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDIES
Richard Huskey – The Ohio State University; Britney Craighead – University of California, Santa Barbara; Michael B.
Miller – University of California, Santa Barbara; Rene Weber – University of California, Santa Barbara
Cognitive control (Miller & Cohen, 2001) is an important framework for understanding the neuropsychological
processes that underlie the successful completion of everyday tasks. Only recently has research in this area
investigated motivational contributions to control allocation (Botvinick & Braver, 2014). An important gap in our
understanding is the way in which intrinsic rewards associated with a task motivate the sustained allocation of control
(Braver et al., 2014). In three behavioral (n = 122, 110, 87) and one functional magnetic resonance imaging (n =
18) studies, we use a naturalistic and open-sourced simulator to show that changes in the balance between task
difficulty and an individual’s ability to perform the task result in different levels of attentional engagement and
intrinsic reward which motivates dynamic shifts between networked brain states. Brain-mapping and
psychophysiological interaction analyses show that high levels of intrinsic reward associated with a balance between
task difficulty and individual ability correspond with increased connectivity between cognitive control and reward
networks. By comparison, a mismatch between task difficulty and individual ability is associated with lower levels of
intrinsic reward and corresponds to increased activity within the default mode network. Insular activation suggests
that motivational salience, as defined by the level of intrinsic reward, drives shifts between networked brain states
associated with task engagement or disengagement. These results underscore recent theorizing suggesting that
higher order cognitions and their resulting behaviors are not easily reducible to their lower-level constitute parts,
especially when considering the relationship between cognition and motivation (Pessoa, 2008).
B – 34
HIGH STAKES ACCELERATE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Catherine Insel – Harvard University; Mia Charifson – Harvard University; Gina Falcone – Harvard University; Leah H.
Somerville – Harvard University
Reinforcement learning comprises the process of incrementally updating value representations based on the receipt
of feedback such as rewards and punishments. This incremental form of learning guides optimal decision making and
future behavior, and allows humans to utilize cues in the environment to approach positive and avoid negative
outcomes. But it remains unclear whether high and low stakes rewards and punishments differentially shape
reinforcement learning over time. To test this question, 32 young adults completed a probabilistic reinforcement

	68

learning task while undergoing fMRI. In this task, participants repeatedly selected between fractals in a pair and
received probabilistic monetary outcomes based on their choices. There were four fractal pairings that represented
different monetary stakes: high gain (+50¢/+0¢), low gain (+25¢/+0¢), high loss (-50¢/-0¢), and low loss (-25¢/0¢). Performance analyses revealed a condition by time interaction, such that the speed of learning over time varied
by motivational condition. Learning improved the fastest for high gain and high loss conditions. These findings reveal
that high stakes rewards and punishments accelerate the learning of probabilistic contingencies. While prior work has
shown that learning improves for gains compared to losses, we observed no effect of learning to approach gains
versus avoid losses. These findings indicate that high value stakes have a greater influence on learning than
contextual valence. Computational models will reveal how stakes and valence influence incremental updating to
feedback on a trial-by-trial basis. Neuroimaging analyses will illuminate how stakes modulate prediction error
responses to unexpected rewards and punishments in the mesolimbic dopamine circuit.
B – 35
NEURAL RESPONSE TO UNPREDICTABLE PEERS IN YOUTH AT-RISK FOR SOCIAL ANXIETY PREDICTS
SOCIAL ANXIETY SYMPTOMS 2-YEARS LATER
Johanna M. Jarcho – Stony Brook University; Ashley R. Smith – National Institute of Mental Health; Stefanie Sequeira
– University of Pittsburgh; Nathan A. Fox – University of Maryland; Heather Henderson – University of Waterloo;
Ellen Leibenluft – National Institute of Mental Health; Daniel S. Pine – National Institute of Mental Health; Eric E.
Nelson – Nationwide Children’s Hospital
The neural mechanisms that promote adolescent onset of social anxiety remain poorly defined. This may be due to
methodological challenges intrinsic to studying social interactions during fMRI, and a paucity of longitudinal data
characterizing the transition from risk to social anxiety onset. To address these issues, 11-year olds at high (N=30)
vs low (N=23) risk for social anxiety, based on longitudinally assessed childhood social reticence (SR), completed the
Virtual School paradigm which models brain function during real-time, ongoing social interactions. Brain function was
used to predict social anxiety at age 13. Participants learned they will interact with “Other Students” who have a
reputation for being ‘nice’, ‘unpredictable, or ‘mean.’ During fMRI, participants enter classrooms populated by Other
Students. They are cued to anticipate social evaluation when “Typing...” appears above each Other Student.
Anticipating unpredictable, relative to predictably mean or nice, evaluation was associated with heighted activity in
bilateral insula and dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC) for high-vs-low SR youth (p<005; ke > 70 voxels). Although SR
was unrelated to social anxiety at age 11, those with a history of high-vs-low SR had more symptoms at age 13,
t=2.14, p<.05. Moreover, heightened engagement of bilateral insula and dACC at age 11 were associated with
greater social anxiety symptoms at age 13 (r’s > .39, p’s<.05). Thus, during early adolescence, at-risk youth
differentially engaged circuits implicated in a salience processing, depending on the type of social evaluation they
anticipate. These alterations, in turn, predict the development of social anxiety symptoms in later adolescence.
B – 36
MVPA TESTING FOR CO-OPTED HIGHER-ORDER SOCIAL COGNITION IN AUTISM
Heejung Jung – University of Colorado Boulder; Maya G. Mosner – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Edward
McLaurin – Duke University; Shabnam Hakimi – Duke University; Jacob M. Parelman – University of Colorado
Boulder; Jessica Kinard – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Payal Chakraborty – Duke University; Gabriel S.
Dichter – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; R. McKell Carter – University of Colorado
Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) often have strong interests in non-social objects. The visual
representation of these objects of interest may result in co-opting of social cognitive brain regions. In one individual
with ASD, face responsive areas of cortex have shown to respond more strongly to a cartoon of interest than human
faces. We predict that higher-order social cognitive regions in neurotypical individuals may be similarly co-opted to
respond to restricted interests during strategic interactions in individuals with ASD. Individuals with ASD and matched
neurotypical individuals played a simplified poker task with a computer opponent and live human opponent, while
being scanned. Unique combinatorial performance (UCP) analysis, a multivariate pattern analysis technique, was
implemented to isolate areas of the brain that uniquely predict the bet/fold decision only against the human
opponent, providing evidence of social involvement of the region. Preliminary multivariate analyses of ASD and
neurotypical groups indicate that UCP in the brains of neurotypical individuals’ is better when interacting with a
human opponent, while the opposite pattern was found for individuals with ASD. That is, multiple brain regions in
neurotypical individuals provided more information that uniquely predicted bet/fold decisions against a human
opponent than against a computer opponent. For individuals with ASD, multiple brain regions provided uniquely
predictive information when playing against a computer opponent. Different patterns of UCP during strategic
gameplay in individuals with ASD and neurotypical individuals provide early support for the co-opting of higher-order
social cognitive areas of the brain.

	

69

B – 37
LOVINGKINDNESS MEDITATION ENGAGES NEURAL MARKERS OF SOCIAL COGNITION AND REDUCES
INTERGROUP BIAS
Yoona Kang – University of Pennsylvania; Emily B. Falk – University of Pennsylvania
Prejudice against stigmatized outgroups arises in part from failures to perceive group members as fully human, and
hence as social targets. For example, depictions of dehumanized outgroups, such as drug addicts and homeless
people, do not elicit neural activity within the brain’s social cognition regions whereas those of other groups do. This
suggests that increasing social perception may be one path to bias reduction. In line with this idea, making positive
wishes for others through lovingkindness meditation has been shown to decrease implicit bias against homeless
people; however, the mechanisms of such effects remain unclear. The current study tested whether changes in social
cognition may underlie the effect of lovingkindness meditation on bias reduction against drug addicts. Brain regions
implicated in social cognition, including ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and right temporal parietal junction
(rTPJ), were monitored during lovingkindness meditation using fMRI. Participants (n=67) were randomly assigned to
complete a lovingkindness or control task, and each task was reinforced via daily text messages for a month.
Participants’ pre to post changes in implicit bias were assessed using an implicit association task. Lovingkindness
meditation, compared to the control task, recruited greater activity within the vmPFC and rTPJ. In turn, those in the
lovingkindness meditation condition went on to show decreases in implicit bias against drug addicts compared to
controls over time. The current findings suggest that lovingkindness meditation may be one way to enhance
consideration of others’ minds and that this can help reduce deeply rooted automatic bias against stigmatized
outgroup members.
B – 38
SOCIAL SKILLS RELATED TO MOTOR MOTOR SKILLS IN CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS WITH AUTISM
SPECTRUM DISORDER
Emily Kilroy – University of Southern California; Laura Harrison – University of Southern California; Alyssa Concha –
University of Southern California; Elizabeth Goo – University of Southern California; Christiana Butera – University of
Southern California; Sharon Cermak – University of Southern California; Lisa Aziz-Zadeh – University of Southern
California
While social deficits are the hallmark of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), impaired performance of skilled gestures,
referred to as dyspraxia, and coordination skills are consistently reported in children with ASD. There is some
evidence to suggest motor impairment is related social impairment, however, the neurological basis for motor
impairment in ASD is not yet well understood. The aim of this study is to understand the relationship between social
and motor skills in ASD and typically developing (TD) children and adolescents. Social and motor skills data were
collected on ten high-functioning children with ASD (6 males, 4 females; mean age 11y 2m [SD 9m], and 12 typically
developing (TD) controls (8 males, 4 females; mean age 11y 6m [SD 1y 3m]. Motor skills measured by the
Movement Assessment Battery for Children-2 (MABC) (Henderson, 2007) and social skills measured by Social
Responsiveness Scale, 2nd Edition (SRS-2) (Aldridge, 2012) and the Interpersonal Reactivity Scale (IRI) (Davis,
1980) were correlated. The MABC-2 and SRS were correlated across all participants (R=-.61, p= .002) and the
MABC-2 and IRI were significantly correlated in the ASD (R=.78, p=.002) group but not in the TD group (R=.78,
p=.382). Results suggest that children and adolescents with weaker motor skills have greater deficits in empathy and
that motor skills may be related to core features of ASD. Ongoing data collection and analysis will relate social and
motor skills to blood oxygen level dependent changes in neural networks during rest related to motor and social
processing.
B – 39
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN GRAY-WHITE MATTER BLURRING IN PREFRONTAL LOBE REGIONS AND
COGNITIVE SET-SHIFTING IN HEALTHY ADULTS
Carl Kim – St. Paul's School; Joehyun Kim – Academy for Medical Science Technology; Sanford Kim – Horace Mann
School
Humans have a unique capacity for higher-order cognition such as planning and multitasking. These abilities are
collectively referred to as “executive functions.” This study investigates cognitive set-shifting, a type of executive
function that involves shifting from one task to another. Advances in neuroimaging have allowed for the structural
integrity of specific frontal-lobe subregions to be probed with greater resolution. One such measure is the intensity
contrast between cortical gray and white matter (GWC), with greater contrast indicating better development
(Blackmon et al., 2011). This study tested whether GWC in 8 subregions of the Prefrontal Cortex (PFC) was
associated with set-shifting abilities in 61 healthy controls. Set-shifting abilities were measured using two
neuropsychology tests: Trail Making Test B (TMT-B) and Wisconsin Card Sorting Test-Perseverative Errors (WCSTPE), with a third test, the Boston Naming Test (BNT), used to determine the discriminant validity of set-shifting
findings. Cognitive set-shifting was significantly correlated with GWC in the left ventrolateral PFC (Broca’s area), the

	70

left and right middle frontal gyri (dorsolateral PFC), and the left and right superior frontal gyri. These findings
indicate that successful set-shifting relies on the structural integrity of ventrolateral and dorsolateral PFC but not the
basal orbitofrontal regions.
B – 40
ALTERED NEURAL HABITUATION TO EMOTIONAL FACES IN PEDIATRIC AND ADULT BIPOLAR
DISORDER
Maria E. Kryza-Lacombe – San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego, Joint Doctoral Program in
Clinical Psychology; Jillian Lee Wiggins – Department of Psychology, San Diego State University; San Diego State
University/University of California, San Diego, Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology; Melissa A. Brotman –
Emotion Development Branch, National Institute of Mental Health; Jill Weisberg – San Diego State University; Carly
Farrington – San Diego State University; Raechel Rodda – San Diego State University; Kenneth Towbin – Emotion
Development Branch, National Institute of Mental Health; Daniel S. Pine – Emotion Development Branch, National
Institute of Mental Health; Ellen Leibenluft – Emotion Development Branch, National Institute of Mental Health
Background: Failure to habituate to repeated presentation of emotional faces has been shown to contribute to
socioemotional symptoms. Previous research indicates that children and adults with bipolar disorder (BD) show
behavioral deficits in face emotion processing as well as abnormal amygdala and prefrontal activation to emotional
faces. However, no study had yet examined neural habituation to emotional faces in BD. Moreover, despite evidence
that BD differs across the lifespan, there has been little work comparing neural profiles of pediatric vs. adult BD.
Methods: Youths (n=24; mean age=16.5 years, SD=2.4) and adults (n=31, mean age=37.7 years, SD=11.0) with
BD as well as healthy youths (n=29; mean age=15.1 years, SD=2.4) and adults (n=22; mean age=29.4 years,
SD=7.2) performed a face emotion labeling task during functional magnetic resonance imaging acquisition.
Results: Whole brain analyses revealed Diagnosis x Age interactions predicting habituation of medial and lateral
prefrontal cortex, including inferior frontal gyrus, to emotional faces. There was also a trend for Diagnosis x Age in
the amygdala. Post-hoc comparisons revealed interactions were driven by differences between adults with BD and
healthy adults. No such differences were apparent in healthy youths vs. youths with BD.
Conclusions: These findings demonstrate that altered habituation to faces may be involved in adult BD. The results
furthermore suggest that adult and pediatric BD may involve different neural mechanisms or that altered habituation
may be a consequence of experiencing BD. These results have implications for facilitating developmentally sensitive
diagnosis and treatment for BD.
B – 41
EMOTION REGULATION OF EMOTIONALLY MALTREATING PARENTS
Iris Lavi – University of Haifa; Elizabeth C. Seibert – University of Southern California; Iris Manor-Binyamini –
University of Haifa; James J. Gross – Stanford University
Child maltreatment is one of the most disheartening issues our society faces. The current study reviews the child
maltreatment literature for evidence pertaining to emotion reactivity and emotion regulation of maltreating parents.
In our review, we were able to find eight papers that compare levels of parental emotion reactivity and emotion
regulation in emotionally maltreating families with these levels in non-maltreating families. We found several results
delineating positive relations between emotional maltreatment and negative affect, depression, verbal aggression and
anger, and negative relations between emotional maltreatment and emotional control, emotion regulation, and
coping strategies. We outline theoretical and practical implications of these results, and emphasize how research into
the etiology of child maltreatment may provide the basis for more effective prevention, screening and treatment
practices. It is on these grounds that we welcome and encourage research contributions towards the eradication of
this vastly complex social phenomenon.
B – 42
CONFLICT IMPACTS INTERGROUP EMPATHY
Yoni Levy – Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University; Abraham Goldstein – Gonda
Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University & Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University; Moran
Influs – Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University; Shafiq Masalha – Department of Psychology, Tel-Aviv
University; Orna Zagoory-Sharon – Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University & Department
of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University; Ruth Feldman – Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan
University, Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University & Yale University, Child Study Center
Adolescents’ participation in intergroup conflicts comprises an imminent global risk, and understanding its neural
underpinnings may open new perspectives. We assessed Jewish-Israeli and Arab-Palestinian adolescents for: brain
response to the pain of ingroup/outgroup protagonists using magnetoencephalography, one-on-one positive and
conflictual interactions with an outgroup member, compromising attitude toward intergroup conflict, and oxytocin
levels. A neural marker of ingroup-biased empathy emerged as late alpha-band rebound (i.e., enhancement) in the

	

71

somatosensory cortex, presumably characterizing top-down processing. Adolescents’ hostility during social
interactions and low compromising attitude towards the conflict explained this neural marker. Furthermore, in the
Jewish-Israeli majority, the neural marker was predicted by higher oxytocin plasma levels, whereas in the ArabPalestinian minority, the ingroup-bias was neurally synchronized among participants. Findings suggest that in cases
of intractable intergroup conflict, top-down control mechanisms block the brain's evolutionary-ancient resonance to
outgroup pain, pinpointing adolescents’ interpersonal and sociocognitive processes as targets for intervention.
B – 43
THE FIRST PUFF IS WITH THE EYES: REWARD CUE REACTIVITY IS ASSOCIATED WITH AN
ATTENTIONAL BIAS TOWARDS TEMPTING ADVERTISEMENTS IN REAL-WORLD VISUAL SCENES
Allison M. Londerée –The Ohio State University; Megan E. Roberts – College of Public Health, The Ohio State
University; Robert S. Chavez – The Ohio State University; Amy K. Ferketich – College of Public Health, The Ohio State
University; Ellen Peters – The Ohio State University; Dylan D. Wagner – The Ohio State University
In both the physical environment and online, humans are continually exposed to advertisements that pair products
with otherwise pleasant or appetitive visual cues. Prior research has demonstrated that adolescents may be
particularly sensitive to appetitive environmental cues and may, therefore, be more susceptible to marketing that
relies on such cues. In the present set of studies, we used eye-tracking to investigate whether adolescent nonsmokers (n=46) demonstrate an attentional bias towards e-cigarette advertisements that use appetitive cues (i.e.,
tempting foods and flavors) as participants examined real-world scenes of convenience storefronts collected in the
Columbus, Ohio region. In addition, we collected multi-modal neuroimaging data (fMRI and DTI) to test whether
functional and structural correlates of reward sensitivity to appetitive cues could predict individual differences in
attentional-bias towards advertisements in the eye-tracking study. Analysis of eye-tracking data revealed an
attentional bias towards flavored e-cigarette advertisements compared to matched unflavored e-cigarette
advertisements during real-world scene viewing. In addition, the magnitude of this bias was correlated with reward
cue-related neural activity to flavored e-cigarette advertisements in the left orbital frontal cortex (OFC) collected
during a separate neuroimaging session. Finally, the structural integrity of a white matter pathway between the
lateral prefrontal cortex and the OFC was inversely correlated with cue-reactivity in the OFC, suggesting that
individual differences in the structural correlates of self-regulation may temper adolescent reward sensitivity.
Together, these findings suggest a neural mechanism for how marketing with appetitive cues can make inroads into
adolescents’ attention and potentially lead to initiation of unhealthy behaviors.
B – 44
A NEUROCULTURAL MODEL OF PAIN
Elizabeth R. Losin – University of Miami; Steven, R. Anderson – University of Miami
Those from minority groups typically report more pain than members of the majority, yet the neurobiological
mechanisms underlying ethnic disparities in pain remain unknown. We propose a neurocultural model of pain that
outlines and connects cultural and neurobiological mechanisms that may account for these group differences and
review the literature that supports the connections between culture, pain, and the brain in each stage of our model.
Our review revealed variability in cultural factors that may contribute to ethnic disparities in pain through each stage
of pain perception outlined in our model, pain precursors, nociception, pain responses, and pain communication, and
the neuroimaging literature suggested physiological and brain mechanisms that may connect this cultural variability
to ethnic disparities in pain report. For example, cultural differences in stressful life experiences such as
discrimination and stress modulating practices such as prayer may modulate pain through changes in pain precursors
such as peripheral inflammation, regional genetic variation in single nucleotide polymorphisms related to pain
sensitivity (e.g. OPRM1) may modulate pain through effects on ascending and descending neural pathways related to
nociception, cultural variability in emotional response preferences may modulate pain through brain systems related
to pain affect and emotional expression, and cultural variability in communication norms such as stoicism may
contribute to ethnic disparities in pain report through brain systems underlying emotion regulation. Employing this
neurocultural model of pain stands to broaden our understanding of the mechanisms underlying group differences in
pain and inform culturally sensitive guidelines to improve pain treatment.
B – 45
EXTERNAL MOTIVATION TO RESPOND WITHOUT PREJUDICE DIFFERENTIALLY ALTERS NEURAL
PROCESSING OF RACE AND SOCIAL STATUS
Bradley D. Mattan – University of Chicago; Jennifer T. Kubota – University of Chicago; Jasmin Cloutier – University of
Chicago
White individuals are frequently perceived to hold higher status than members of other racial groups, even by
perceivers who are otherwise committed to avoiding prejudice. This fMRI study (N=61) examined the neural
correlates of impression formation as a function of both the target’s race and SES and the perceiver’s motivation to

	72

avoid expressing prejudice. Participants formed general impressions of Black and White faces ascribed with high or
low SES. ROI analyses focused on regions supporting race- and status-based reward (nucleus accumbens) and
evaluation (VMPFC) as well as status differentiation (right IPS). Greater external motivation to respond without
prejudice (EMS) predicted BOLD increases for White versus Black targets in the bilateral nucleus accumbens,
potentially suggesting that forming impressions of White targets was more rewarding for individuals with high EMS.
EMS also predicted BOLD decreases for high-status compared to low-status targets in the VMPFC. In other words,
increases in EMS altered BOLD responses to the non-racial status dimension (i.e., SES). This change occurred in the
VMPFC, an area associated with person evaluation, indicating that the evaluative consequences of non-racial
dimensions (e.g., status) may decrease or reverse as a function of EMS. These effects remained significant even
when controlling for internal motivation to respond without prejudice (IMS). In summary, EMS differentially altered
the neural processing of race and non-racial dimensions (e.g., status) during impression formation.
B – 46
AMYGDALA RESPONSE TO DISTRESS CUES AND CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL PERSONALITY;
MODERATION BY TRAUMA
Harma Meffert – Center for Neurobehavioral Research, Boys Town National Research Hospital; Patrick M. Tyler –
Center for Neurobehavioral Research, Boys Town National Research Hospital; Mary L. Botkin – Center for
Neurobehavioral Research, Boys Town National Research Hospital; Anna K. Erway – Center for Neurobehavioral
Research, Boys Town National Research Hospital; Venkata Kolli – Center for Neurobehavioral Research, Boys Town
National Research Hospital; Stuart F. White – Center for Neurobehavioral Research, Boys Town National Research
Hospital; Kayla Pope – Center for Neurobehavioral Research, Boys Town National Research Hospital; James R. Blair –
Center for Neurobehavioral Research, Boys Town National Research Hospital
Youth displaying disruptive behavior show amygdala hypo-responsiveness to fearful expressions as a function of a
callous-unemotional (CU) personality (i.e., reduced guilt and empathy). This has been related to increased levels of
goal-directed antisocial behavior and instrumental aggression. However, some research suggests that trauma
exposure may moderate this relationship. Specifically, work has identified two groups of disruptive youth with
equivalent high levels of CU-traits, but differing levels of anxiety and trauma exposure. The objective of the first of
two studies was to examine whether trauma exposure influenced the neurobiology underlying fear expression
processing in 72 youth with varying levels of disruptive behavior and trauma exposure. Participants performed a
gender discrimination task while viewing morphed expressions (0%, 50%, 100%, 150% fear). A linear regression
analysis on the BOLD data, using level of CU-traits and trauma exposure as covariates, showed a significant CUtraits-by-trauma exposure interaction within right amygdala; CU-traits were negatively associated with fear intensity
modulated amygdala responses, but only in low trauma participants. The second study aimed at examining how the
neurobiology underpinning fear expression processing predicted social behavior as a function of trauma exposure.
Participants were invited back to complete a social goals task. Data suggest that stronger fear responsivity in the
amygdala predicts prosocial behavior in low trauma youth, whereas stronger fear responsivity predicts non-social
behavior (revenge) in high trauma youth. The current data suggest that the pathophysiology associated with CUpersonality may depend on trauma exposure.
B – 47
ACUTE AND REPETITIVE FRONTO-CEREBELLAR TDCS STIMULATION IMPROVES MOOD IN NONDEPRESSED PARTICIPANTS
Simon Newstead – Swansea University; Hayley Young – Swansea University; David Benton – Swansea University;
Maria Andrade – Swansea University; Marc Clement – Swansea University; Frédéric Boy – Swansea University
Introduction: tDCS has previously demonstrated potential as a therapeutic intervention in the treatment of mood
disorders. Prior studies have predominately focused on stimulation of the prefrontal-cortex, achieving varying
degrees of success regarding elevation of positive mood in healthy individuals. However, the Cerebellum has an
increasingly recognized role in emotion, affective state and the presentation of some psychopathologies. Here we
expand upon the conventional PFC focused paradigms to investigate the influence of fronto-cerebellar stimulation
upon mood. Method: We applied anodal stimulation to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex dlPFC in conjunction
with cathodal stimulation to the right Cb in healthy participants (n = 51). Using a single blind, pre-test/post-test
design, participants were assessed for changes in mood, heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV) in response
to a single 12-minute stimulation. A number of participants (n = 25) continued with the trial, in total receiving 3
active or sham stimulations over 5 days, for which they were again assessed for changes in mood.
Results: Fronto-cerebellar stimulation elevated mood in the active condition for both single and repeated
stimulations, of which the latter displayed a progressive elevation of mood, with a potentiated effect between
stimulations 2 and 3. No change was noted in either single or repeated stimulations for the sham condition.
Conclusion: Fronto-cerebellar tDCS stimulation advantageously influences mood in healthy participants, with an
accumulative and potentiated effect following successive stimulations. Fronto-cerebellar stimulation may provide a

	

73

novel therapeutic adjunctive or pre-emptive intervention in stress related disorders and certain psychopathologies.
B – 48
EFFECT OF SHORT TERM EXPERIENCES ON MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM ACTIVITY DIFFERS BETWEEN
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL AND UNIVERSITY STUDENTS
Yuki Nishimura – Kyushu University; Yuki Ikeda – Kyushu University; Airi Suematsu – Kyushu University; Shigekazu
Higuchi – Kyushu University
Human mirror neuron system (MNS) is one of the important brain functions to communicate each other easily for us.
Children also have MNS. However, some recent studies have suggested that children’s mirror system has different
characteristics compared to adults. In this study, we aimed to reveal the effect of imitating experience on the MNS
activity of two age groups and compared it between them. Fifty-three elementary school and university student’s
participated in this study after they provided written informed consent. The MNS activity was measured before and
after the imitation (or control) phase using EEG mu-wave event-related oscillation in order to determine the effect of
the experience. In the imitation phase, participants imitated the same finger movements which were presented
during the EEG sessions by following the instructions given by a video clip of hands. Control group operated exactly
the same movements with the other group, but the video clip expressed the finger movements with dots and arrows.
As a result, we found that both adults and children group’s MNS activity increased after imitating experience.
Furthermore, children’s MNS activity decreased by control condition and showed significant difference between
conditions, while adults increased or at least sustained their activity and showed no significant difference between
conditions. These results suggest that the ability and efficiency of integrating the experience into one’s motor
images, which is one of the major functions of MNS, differ between the two age groups.
B – 49
THE CONTRIBUTION OF RTPJ TO SOCIAL COGNITION: A COMBINED FMRI AND RTMS STUDY
Joakim Norberg – Uppsala University; Stephanie McMains – Harvard University; Jason Mitchell – Harvard University
Functional neuroimaging studies have associated social cognition with a number of brain regions, including the right
temporoparietal junction (rTPJ). However, fMRI only provides correlational data. The present study used transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) to investigate the causal contribution of the rTPJ to social cognition. To do this, we used
a double dissociation paradigm with a decision making task that included two conditions (social and nonsocial).
Participants first performed the task during fMRI. Analyses showed relatively greater activation in rTPJ during the
social condition and greater activation of the left middle frontal gyrus (lmFG) during the nonsocial condition.
Individual functional data was subsequently used to guide TMS to the part of rTPJ that showed the strongest
activation to the social condition, and to the part of lmFG that showed the strongest activation to the nonsocial
condition. We used repetitive TMS for 30 minutes with 110% of motor threshold on two consecutive sessions (rTPJ
and lmFG counterbalanced) followed by the task. Analyses showed no effect of rTMS on rTPJ, but a trend for rTMS
on lmFG, such that participants committed more errors on the nonsocial than the social task. The results suggest that
although the rTPJ was activated in the social condition, it might not have been involved in the decision making
process or production of behavior.
B – 50
IDEAL AFFECT MATCH LOWERS NEURAL HURDLES TO GIVING
BoKyung Park – Stanford University; Elizabeth Blevins – Stanford University; Brian Knutson – Stanford University;
Jeanne L. Tsai – Stanford University
Why do people give to others? We propose that people may give more to those whose emotional expressions match
how they ideally want to feel (“ideal affect match”). Culture has been shown to shape ideal affect, such that
European Americans want to feel excited and enthusiastic more and peaceful and serene less than East Asians. We
asked European Americans and Koreans to play multiple trials of a Dictator Game with recipients who varied in
emotional expression (excited, calm), race (White, Asian), and sex (male, female). Consistent with their culture’s
valued affect, European Americans gave more to recipients with an excited smile than those with a calm smile,
whereas Koreans gave more to recipients with a calm smile than those with an excited smile. These findings held
regardless of recipient race and sex. We then used fMRI to test possible affective and/or mentalizing mechanisms.
Increased activity in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc; associated with reward anticipation) preceded giving, but so did
decreased activity in the right temporo-parietal junction (rTPJ; associated with mentalizing). Ideal affect match
enhanced giving selectively through decreased rTPJ activity, suggesting that people may give more to strangers who
seem to share their affective values, and therefore invoke trust.

	74

B – 51
COMPUTATIONAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING MORAL CHOICES ADJUSTMENT TO DESCRIPTIVE
NORMS
Philip Parnamets* – Karolinska Institutet; Bjorn Lindstrom* – University of Zurich; Simon Jangard – Karolinska
Institutet; Andreas Olsson – Karolinska Institutet
Moral choices are ideally underpinned by an agent’s prescriptive norms. However, humans are also highly sensitive to
social context and descriptive norms. Previous work has shown that participants, as third-party observers of public
goods games (PGG), will adjust judgments of how moral a prosocial or selfish action is, depending on how many
agents they see performing that action. Here we extend those findings to binary choices, and fit drift-diffusion
models (DDM) to the choice and response time distributions. Participants saw an array of agents each having chosen
either to invest (prosocial) or keep (selfish) their money in the PGG, and were then asked to decide if one of those
agents had behaved morally correct or not. We found that participants’ binary choices were affected by the amount
of prosocial behaviours on display, being more likely to decide that the prosocial behaviour was moral when such
behaviours were more common. Importantly, using DDM, we found that participants’ choices were characterised by a
bias towards approving selfish behaviours. The commonness of prosocial behaviours affected the drift-rate and
decision bounds positively, meaning stronger descriptive prosocial norms led to more stringent decision criteria and
higher prosocial evidence accumulation. We also found a framing effect when asking about selfish behaviours such
that this shifted both bounds and drift rates. In other words, both the descriptive norms and the behaviour being
judged strongly affect what moral choice is made. Our findings provide novel insights into the real-time negotiation
of selfish and prosocial tendencies in moral choice.
*Denotes equal contributions to this work
B – 52
NOVELTY, VALENCE AND TRAIT ANXIETY IN THE BED NUCLEUS OF THE STRIA TERMINALIS,
AMYGDALA AND HIPPOCAMPUS: A HIGH RESOLUTION 7T FMRI STUDY
Walker S. Pedersen – University of Wisconsin Milwaukee; L. Tugan Muftuler – Medical College of Wisconsin; Christine
L. Larson – University of Wisconsin Milwaukee
The hippocampus and amygdala exhibit novelty-sensitivity that is reduced in participants with inhibited temperament,
a construct related to trait anxiety. Although the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BST) is highly connected to the
amygdala and is implicated in anxiety, whether the BST responds to novelty remains unstudied, as well as how trait
anxiety may modulate this response. Additionally how novelty, stimulus negativity and trait anxiety interact to affect
activity in these areas is also unclear. To address these questions, we presented participants with novel and
repeated, fearful and neutral faces, while measuring brain activity via fMRI, and also assessed participants’ selfreported trait anxiety. As the small size of the BST makes assessing its activity at typical fMRI resolution difficult, we
employed high resolution 7 Tesla scanning. Our results replicate findings of novelty-sensitivity that is independent of
valence in the hippocampus and amygdala. We also found left amygdala sensitivity to stimulus negativity that was
blunted for high trait anxiety participants. Our results also provide novel evidence for a BST novelty response toward
neutral, but not fearful faces. We also found that the novelty responses exhibited by each of these ROIs was blunted
in participants with high trait anxiety. These findings extend past research on the response to novel stimuli in the
hippocampus and amygdala at high resolution, and are the first to demonstrate trait anxiety modulated noveltysensitivity in the BST that is dependent on stimulus valence.
B – 53
THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN DEPRESSION SEVERITY AND STIGMATIZED BELIEFS IN EMIRATI
UNIVERSITY STUDENTS: PRELIMINARY FINDINGS OF A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY
Arif Pendi – University of California, Irvine; Hajra Hussain – Amity University; Jahanzeb Ashraf – American University
of the Caribbean; David A. Baron – University of Southern California
Introduction: Depression is commonly experienced by university students worldwide. Unfortunately, the stigma
associated with mental illness has been known to inhibit help seeking behavior. Therefore, the relationship between
stigmatized beliefs and depression severity has serious implications for mental healthcare utilization among students.
We hypothesized that depression severity would be associated with greater personal and perceived stigma among
university students in the United Arab Emirates. Methods: A survey consisting of socio-demographic questions,
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), and Depression Stigma Scale (DSS) was sent via email to students in the
United Arab Emirates. Respondents were classified as students with severe to moderate depression or those with
mild depression to none and compared in terms of continuous scores on the DSS subscales for personal and
perceived stigma via t-test. A series of linear regressions was used to identify predictors of stigmatized beliefs.
Results: Approximately 39.5% of completed responses (n=129) met the criteria for moderate to severe depression
severity. This group exhibited less personal (p=0.438) and perceived stigma (p=0.048). Heterosexuality (p=0.004)
and non-Indian ethnicity were both predictors of greater perceived stigma (p=0.007). No predictors of personal

	

75

stigma were identified. Conclusions: Depression severity was associated with less perceived stigma in respondents, in
contrast to our hypothesis and previous findings that depression severity was linked to greater perceived stigma in
American undergraduate students. These findings indicate that the relationship between depression and stigmatized
beliefs may not be consistent across cultures.
B – 54
CONSEQUENCES FOR PEERS DIFFERENTIALLY BIAS COMPUTATIONS ABOUT RISK FROM
ADOLESCENCE TO ADULTHOOD
Katherine E. Powers – Harvard University; Gina Falcone – Harvard University; Gideon Yaffe – Yale University;
Catherine A. Hartley – New York University; Juliet Y. Davidow – Harvard University; Hedy Kober – Yale University;
Leah H. Somerville – Harvard University
Adolescents routinely take risks that impact the well-being of the friends they are with. However, the extent to which
consequences for friends factor into decisions to take risks is unknown. Here we used an neuroeconomic decisionmaking task to test whether risky choices are guided by the positive and negative consequences they promise for
their peers. We show that risky decision computations increasingly assimilate friends’ outcomes throughout
adolescence into adulthood, in an asymmetric manner that overemphasizes protecting friends from incurring loss.
Whereas adults accommodated friend outcomes to a greater degree when the friend was present and witnessing
these choices, adolescents did so regardless of whether a friend could witness their decisions, highlighting the
fundamentality of adolescent social motivations. By demonstrating that outcomes for another individual can
powerfully tune an actor’s tolerance towards risk, these results identify a key factor underlying peer-related
motivations for risky behavior, with implications for legal, risk prevention, and adolescent health policy initiatives.
B – 55
THE WILLIAMS SYNDROME PROSOCIALITY GENE GTF2I MEDIATES OXYTOCIN REACTIVITY AND
SOCIAL ANXIETY IN A HEALTHY POPULATION
Tanya L. Procyshyn – Simon Fraser University; Jason Spence – Simon Fraser University; Silven Read – Simon Fraser
University; Neil Watson – Simon Fraser University; Bernard J. Crespi – Simon Fraser University
The neurohormone oxytocin plays a central role in human social behaviour and cognition, and oxytocin dysregulation
may contribute to psychiatric disorders. However, genetic factors influencing individual variation in the oxytocinergic
system remain poorly understood. We genotyped 169 healthy adults for a functional polymorphism in GTF2I (general
transcription factor II-I), a gene associated with high prosociality and reduced social anxiety in Williams syndrome, a
condition reported to involve high oxytocin levels and reactivity. Participants’ salivary oxytocin levels were measured
before and after watching a validated empathy-inducing video. Oxytocin reactivity, defined as pre- to post-video
percentage change in salivary oxytocin, varied substantially and significantly between individuals with different GTF2I
genotypes, with a trend towards an interaction between genotype and sex. Individuals with more oxytocin-reactive
genotypes also reported significantly lower social anxiety. These findings suggest a model whereby GTF2I has a
continuum of effects on human sociality, from the extreme social phenotypes and oxytocin dysregulation associated
with gene deletion in Williams syndrome, to individual differences in oxytocin reactivity and sociality associated with
common polymorphisms in healthy populations.
B – 56
SEX-DIFFERENCES IN ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX REPRESENTATION DURING EVALUATIONS OF FACIAL
ATTRACTIVENESS
Kristina M. Rapuano – Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton – Dartmouth College; William M. Kelley – Dartmouth
College
Males and females equally depend on mate selection for reproductive success, yet sex-differences in mate selection
criteria have been widely observed. Previous studies have shown activity within putative reward regions of the brain
(e.g., the nucleus accumbens [NAcc]; orbitofrontal cortex [OFC]) to increase linearly with facial attractiveness
ratings, and further report a sex difference in the OFC (Cloutier et al., 2008). An open question is whether this
reflects a fundamental difference between the sexes or whether it reflects divergent evaluation strategies by males
(e.g., sexual interest) and females (e.g., physical aesthetics) while evaluating attractiveness. Sixty-eight subjects (30
male) viewed opposite-sex faces during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In order to equate cognitive
strategies between sexes, subjects were instructed to explicitly evaluate either the attractiveness or sexual
desirability of each face on a 1 (“Very attractive”; “Very desirable”) to 3 (“Unattractive”; “Undesirable”) scale.
Consistent with our previous findings, both the NAcc and OFC correlated with participant ratings, but only OFC
activity demonstrated a sex-difference. Here we extend these findings to show that this difference is eliminated when
females are asked to judge sexual desirability. Further, the representational similarity (RSA) between tasks in the
OFC was greater in males than in females. This relationship paralleled participants’ behavioral ratings, which were
more consistent between tasks in males. Taken together, this suggests that males and females utilize divergent

	76

strategies while evaluating facial attractiveness, whereby males may be engaged in implicit sexual evaluations and
females may be engaged in more overt evaluations of physical aesthetics.
B – 57
CONTEXT EFFECT MODULATES CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM RESPONSE TO INFANT
VOCALIZATIONS
Paola Rigo – Nanyang Technological University; Atiqah Azhari – Nanyang Technological University; Anna Truzzi –
University of Trento & Brain Science Institute, RIKEN; Gianluca Esposito – Nanyang Technological University &
University of Trento
The quality of a caregiver’s care and attention towards an infant plays an imperative role in shaping the infant’s early
psychological and physiological development. However, attention towards salient stimuli is modulated by external
contextual cues. Thus, it is essential to elucidate how contexts exert their influence on adults’ physiological responses
to infant vocalizations which includes infant cry (IC) and laugh (IL). Here, employing Near-infrared Spectroscopy
(NIRS) and Electrocardiogram (ECG), we explore the effects of two contextual environments on adults’ responses to
infant vocalizations: domestic environment (DE) (self-referential settings that relates to personal life); outside the
domestic environment (OE) (outside of personal life). To increase the personal relevance of the contextual stimuli,
half of participants were asked to imagine “to be inside the visual scene” (TBI). NIRS and ECG were recorded from
33 and 59 adult participants respectively during the presentation of infant vocalizations and control sounds. Results
showed that IC in OE activated the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (Hbtot) more significantly than in DE,
whereas IL in OE activated the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) only in non-TBI condition. Additionally,
ECG results showed that IL in OE elicited greater parasympathetic nervous activity, as indicated by lower heart rate
variability (RMSSD). Findings highlight the importance of contextual information in regulating physiological responses
to salient stimuli from the infant, such as IC and IL. Therefore, contextual information should be assessed and taken
into account in order to better understand the mechanisms underlying caregiver-infant interactions.
B – 58
ENHANCING POSITIVE AFFECT IN NEGATIVE CONTEXTS ENGAGES DISTINCT BRAIN ACTIVATION IN
HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS AND PATIENTS WITH MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
Odile Rodrik – Columbia University; Chelsea Boccagno – Columbia University; Bruce Doré – Columbia University;
Tanya Singh – New York State Psychiatric Institute; Jochen Weber – Columbia University; Jeffrey Miller – New York
State Psychiatric Institute; Maria Oquendo – New York State Psychiatric Institute; Barbara Stanley – New York State
Psychiatric Institute; J. John Mann – New York State Psychiatric Institute; Kevin N. Ochsner – Columbia University
The capacity to create positive meaning from negative experiences is an adaptive regulation technique that has
numerous physical and mental benefits, and is notably diminished in people with major depressive disorder (MDD).
Though recent neuroimaging work has identified the brain regions underlying the transformation of a negative
response to a positive one in healthy populations, the neural mechanisms underlying positive reappraisal (i.e., the
up-regulation of positive affect) to negative stimuli in patients with MDD is unclear. The current study examined brain
and behavioral responses to negative images in healthy individuals (N= 19) and patients with MDD (N = 20). While
undergoing a functional magnetic resonance imaging scan, participants viewed negative images from the
International Affective Picture System and were asked to reappraise or to look and respond naturally to the images.
Participants then rated their positive and negative affect. Behaviorally, both healthy controls and those with MDD
reported decreased negative affect and increased positive affect when reappraising relative to responding naturally.
However, the brain regions recruited to reappraise successfully for these populations differ. Specifically, patients, but
not controls, demonstrated increased precuneus (a region associated with attentional control and perspective taking)
and insula (a region commonly implicated in emotion regulation) activation during reappraisal trials. Furthermore,
precuneus activation tracked with negative reappraisal success. Controls, however, showed decreased insula
activation during reappraisal trials. Overall, these results provide further insight into the mechanisms underlying
positive reappraisal in healthy individuals, and illuminate the process of positive reappraisal in MDD.
B – 59
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF COGNITIVE CONTROL DURING OUT-GROUP ENCOUNTERS
UNDER THREAT
Estee A. Rubien-Thomas – Yale University; Alexandra O. Cohen – Sackler Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College;
Binyam Nardos – Oregon Health and Science University; Anfei Li – Sackler Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College;
Alessandra Cervera – Yale University; Kim A. Taylor-Thompson – School of Law, New York University; Jennifer L.
Eberhardt – Stanford University; Damien A. Fair – Oregon Health and Science University; Jennifer A. Richeson – Yale
University; BJ Casey – Yale University & Sackler Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College
The recent incidents of violence against unarmed men of color at the hands of police have prompted questions
regarding what factors contribute to these outcomes. A key question is whether there is a relative loss in cognitive

	

77

control during interracial encounters under perceived threat. The current study used a novel fMRI paradigm to
examine cognitive control during out-group encounters under threat in 31 Black and White adult participants (17
black, 16 female). Participants performed a variation of the Cognitive Control Under Emotional Influences (CCUE)
task (Cohen et al. 2015) that consisted of neutral or fearful, Black and White faces as targets (go trials) and rare
non-targets (no-go trials), under sustained neutral or threat states. Black and White participants performed equally
well to neutral Black and White faces in the neutral state (p =.4). However, under conditions of perceived threat,
both Black and White participants were more reactive to black faces (i.e., made more false alarms (p=.02)).
Preliminary imaging results suggest both cognitive control and perceptual neural circuitry may be associated with the
enhanced reactivity to Black faces under threatening conditions. Together these findings suggest a loss in impulse
control, specific to the race of the stimulus rather than out-group interactions, that is modulated by perceived threat.
This work may provide new insights into police-citizen interracial encounters under threat and offer new approaches
for intervening.
B – 60
BRAIN CONNECTIVITY DYNAMICS DURING SOCIAL INTERACTION REFLECT SOCIAL NETWORK
STRUCTURE
Ralf Schmaelzle – Michigan State University/University of Pennsylvania; Matthew Brook O’Donnell – University of
Pennsylvania; Javier Garcia – U.S. Army Research Laboratory; Joseph Bayer – The Ohio State University; Christopher
Cascio – University of Pennsylvania; Danielle Bassett – University of Pennsylvania; Jean Vettel – U.S. Army Research
Laboratory; Emily Falk – University of Pennsylvania
Social ties are crucial for humans. Disruption of ties through social exclusion has a marked effect on our thoughts
and feelings; however, such effects can be tempered by broader social network resources. Here, we use functional
magnetic resonance imaging data acquired from 80 male adolescents to investigate how social exclusion modulates
functional connectivity within and across brain networks involved in social pain and understanding the mental states
of others (i.e., mentalizing). Furthermore, using objectively logged friendship network data, we examine how
individual variability in brain reactivity to social exclusion might shape social network structures, as indexed by the
density of friendship networks. We find that social exclusion prompts increased connectivity within a set of regions
previously identified as a mentalizing system. These results are consistent across the regions of interest as well as a
whole-brain analysis. Next, examining how social network characteristics are associated with task-based connectivity
dynamics, participants who show greater changes in connectivity within the mentalizing system when socially
excluded by peers had less dense friendship networks. This work provides novel insight to understand how
distributed brain systems respond to social and emotional challenges, and how such brain dynamics may also shape
broader social networks.
B – 61
THE IMPACT OF CLINICAL SYMPTOMS ON NEURAL REACTIVITY TO MONETARY REWARD IN THE
SCHOOL-AGE OFFSPRING OF DEPRESSED PARENTS
Karen T. G. Schwartz – San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego Joint Doctoral Program in
Clinical Psychology; Maria Kryza-Lacombe – San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego Joint
Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology; Ysabella Panggat – San Diego State University; Sophie Bills – San Diego
State University; Phil Spechler – University of Maryland; Sarah Blankenship – University of Maryland; Lea Dougherty
– University of Maryland; Jillian L. Wiggins – San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego Joint
Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology
Identifying neural profiles that may predict psychopathology in at-risk individuals is important to efficiently direct
preventive care. Alterations in reward processing may be a risk factor for depression. The current study characterized
the neural substrates of reward processing in children at low- and high-risk for depression due to maternal
depression. Children (N=46, 5.93-9.63 years) performed a monetary incentive delay task during fMRI acquisition.
The whole brain analysis of the three-way interaction, Group (low-risk vs. high-risk) x Performance (hit vs. miss) x
Condition (no reward vs. reward), yielded five significant clusters: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (xyz=50,35,15;
F1,44=20.01, k=71), parahippocampal gyrus (xyz=5,-32,6; F1,44=14.88, k=46), superior temporal sulcus (xyz=-44,41,9; F1,44=14.76, k=32), dorsal prefrontal cortex (xyz=29,20,42; F1,44=13.57, k=25), and inferior temporal gyrus
(xyz=59,-56,-4; F1,44=13.68, k=21), all pcorrected<.05. All regions exhibited similar patterns, whereby the high
versus low risk group showed blunted differences in activation between the no-reward and reward conditions when
they hit the target, and differences in the opposite direction when they missed the target. Region-of-interest analyses
indicated significant three-way interactions in the putamen (right: F1,44=4.10, p=.049; left: F1,44=5.02, p=.030),
right nucleus accombens (F1,44=4.84, p=.033), and left amygdala (F1,44=4.89, p=.032). The pattern of results was
similar to that observed in the whole brain analysis; however, post-hocs did not survive correction. Results suggest
that children at high risk for depression are less able to flexibly and appropriately modulate their neural response to
different reward task conditions. The final poster will explore how child clinical characteristics present at the time of

	78

the scan impacted these findings.
B – 62
THE INSULA AND NEGATIVE URGENCY DURING SAFE SEX NEGOTIATION
Benjamin J. Smith – University of Southern California; Feng Xue – University of Southern California; Vita Droutman –
University of Southern California; Emily Barkley-Levenson – University of Southern California; James A. Melrose –
University of Southern California; Lynn C. Miller – University of Southern California; John R. Monterosso – University
of Southern California; Antoine Bechara – University of Southern California; P. Robert Appleby – University of
Southern California; Stephen J. Read – University of Southern California
HIV is most prevalent among men who have sex with men (MSM), and although most MSM use condoms consistently
during casual sex, some take risks. To better understand the psychology of those risky decisions, we examined
neural correlates of playing a virtual sexual “hook up” game in an fMRI scanner in MSM who had, in the past 90
days, previously been sexually risky (N=76) or safe (N=31). We found that during potentially risky sexual choices,
previously risky MSM had more insula activity – typically associated with desire and proprioceptive urge – than
previously safe MSM. Trait measures provided greater clarity. Real-life sexual risk within the population was related
with trait negative urgency (rs=0.41). Activity in the region of the right posterior insula cortex that contrasts risky
and safe MSM also correlates with negative urgency. A mediation analysis showed that the relationship between
negative urgency and real-life risky sex was mediated by neural activity in an insular-centered network. Trait
negative urgency could drive sexual risk by increasing the likelihood of taking a risk during safe sex negotiation.
B – 63
THE SOCIAL VALUE OF POSITIVE AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL
Megan E. Speer – Rutgers University; Vivian Mai – Rutgers University; Mauricio R. Delgado – Rutgers University
Positive memory retrieval elicits pleasant feelings that can combat negative affective states and enhance well-being.
However, not all positive memories are created equal. When thinking about our most treasured memories, they are
likely experiences shared with other people (e.g., birthday party) rather than by oneself (e.g., receiving good
grades). We explored whether the social context within a positive memory enhanced its subjective value and
contributed to an individual’s well-being. Participants (Study1; N=47) were asked how much they would be willing to
pay to re-experience positive memories that occurred with socially close others (high-social), with acquaintances
(low-social) or alone (nonsocial). When controlling for how positive each memory made them feel, participants were
still willing to pay 2 times more for high-social than for low-social or nonsocial memories. Likewise, participants chose
to reminisce about high-social memories more frequently (56% of the time) than less social ones of equal positive
feeling (p=.025). During fMRI scanning (Study2; N=19), recalling social relative to nonsocial memories engaged the
ventromedial PFC and posterior cingulate cortex, potentially related to increased social processing, even when
controlling for positive feeling. Finally, we examined the benefit of social context by asking participants (Study3;
N=20) to recall social and nonsocial memories after acute stress exposure. Participants whose memory recall
included higher social context showed a greater dampening of the physiological stress response (i.e., cortisol). Taken
together, these findings suggest that social context inherent in a positive memory enhances its value, providing a
possible mechanism by which recalling positive memories aids stress coping.
B – 64
CAN BRAIN ACTIVITY PREDICT STOCK PRICES?
Mirre Stallen – Stanford University; Nicholas Borg – Stanford University; Parimarjan Negi; Brian Knutson
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) activity in circuits associated with anticipatory affect (Knutson &
Greer, 2008) has been used not only to predict trial-to-trial choice within subjects, but, more recently, aggregate
choice as well (e.g., Venkatraman et al., 2015; Genevsky et al., 2015). Following these demonstrations, we sought to
determine whether individual brain activity could inform predictions about changes in stock prices. While undergoing
FMRI acquisition, participants (n=41) viewed trend lines reflecting updates of actual, anonymous, stock prices. For
each price update, participants decided whether they wanted to invest (i.e. bet that the stock price would increase
on the next day – if so they gained $1, but if not they lost $1) or not invest (i.e. not bet, in which case they received
$0 for that round). Results showed that activity in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) predicted choices to invest within
subject. When examining whether group brain activity could forecast changes in stock prices on the next day, results
demonstrated that activity in the NAcc predicted stock price above and beyond the effect of the participants’ own
choices. This result remained significant after including standard financial measures used to predict stock market
performance, such as slope or volatility over the past days. By developing a novel and incentive-compatible stock
investment choice task, we not only were able to replicate previous findings that NAcc activity can predict individual
risky choice, but we also obtained preliminary data suggesting that brain activity may predict stock prices above and
beyond choice.

	

79

B – 65
ENDOGENOUS OPIOID RECEPTOR BLOCKADE INHIBITS SOCIAL BONDING IN HUMANS: MAIN EFFECTS
AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
Kristina Tchalova – McGill University; Geoff MacDonald – University of Toronto
Non-human animal research has shown that endogenous opioid neurotransmission plays a critical role in mediating
social reward and attachment formation. In the first investigation of opioid involvement in the emergence of human
social bonds, we examined whether opioid blockade would inhibit intimacy-fostering behavior (self-disclosure) and
feelings of social connection during an initial interpersonal encounter. Eighty pairs of previously unacquainted
participants received either 50mg of the opioid receptor antagonist naltrexone or placebo prior to engaging in a
closeness building exercise centered on escalating reciprocal self-disclosure. Multilevel analyses revealed that,
compared to placebo dyads, naltrexone dyads reported engaging in less intimate self-disclosure, perceived their
partners as less disclosing, and desired less interpersonal closeness with their partner. The naltrexone group did not
report significantly lower feelings of connection relative to the placebo group; however, participants receiving
naltrexone, unlike placebo participants, did not experience increases in positive affect after the social bonding task.
Furthermore, several individual difference variables emerged as moderators in exploratory analyses. Specifically, the
inhibitory effects of naltrexone on feelings of social connection were particularly pronounced for individuals scoring
low on Openness to Experience; additionally, naltrexone attenuated the tendency of individuals high in attachment
anxiety to seek more interpersonal closeness. These individual difference findings are discussed in terms of the
reward-processing and anxiolytic functions of the endogenous opioid system. Altogether, these data have relevance
for the study of conditions characterized by social deficits, as well as the social connection-physical health link.
Additionally, implications for naltrexone treatment of addiction disorders will be discussed.
B – 66
DYSFUNCTION IN ANIMACY INFORMATION PROCESSING IN ADOLESCENTS WITH DISRUPTIVE
BEHAVIOR DISORDERS AND CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL TRAITS: IMPLICATIONS FOR ASOCIAL
BEHAVIOR
Laura C. Thornton – Boys Town National Research Hospital; Elizabeth A. Penner – Creighton University & University
of Nebraska Medical Center; Zachary T. Nolan – Pennsylvania State University School of Medicine; Christopher J.
Adalio – University of California, Berkeley; Stephen Sinclair – National Institute of Mental Health; Harma Meffert –
Boys Town National Research Hospital; Soonjo Hwang – University of Nebraska Medical Center; R. James R. Blair –
Boys Town National Research Hospital; Stuart F. White – Boys Town National Research Hospital
Amygdala dysfunction during emotion processing has been implicated in youth with Disruptive Behavior Disorders
(DBD; Conduct Disorder/Oppositional Defiant Disorder), particularly those with callous-unemotional (CU) traits.
Critically, the amygdala is not only responsive to emotional (including fear/distress) relative to neutral stimuli, but
also to animate relative to inanimate stimuli. This responsiveness to social stimuli may relate to the asocial behavior
shown by youth with DBDs – particularly those with CU traits. However, the processing of animacy information in
youth with DBDs has not been previously investigated. 29 youth with DBD and 20 TD youth, matched for IQ, age
(Mage=14.45, SD=2.052) and gender, completed a dot probe task during fMRI. Stimuli consisted of
threatening/animate, threatening/inanimate, neutral/animate and neutral/inanimate images. Youth with DBDs failed
to increased amygdala activation to animate relative to inanimate stimuli. Moreover, within youth with DBDs, CU
traits were inversely associated with activation to animate relative to inanimate stimuli within the amygdala. Whole
brain analyses found that youth with DBDs failed to show an appropriate increase in activation to animate relative to
inanimate stimuli compared to TD youth in middle temporal gyrus and fusiform gyrus. These data suggest that youth
with DBDs and high levels of CU traits exhibit dysfunction in animacy processing in the amygdala. Thus, reduced
responsiveness to animacy stimuli may relate to reports of a lack of interest in social contact in youth with DBDs,
particularly those with CU traits.
B – 67
SPACE, TIME, AND GAZE: HOW KINEMATIC MODULATION AND EYE-GAZE OPTIMIZE COMMUNICATIVE
INTERACTIONS
James P. Trujillo – Radboud University; Irina Simanova – Radboud University; Harold Bekkering – Radboud
University; Asli Özyürek – Radboud University & Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Actions may be used to directly act on the world around us, or as a means of communication, e.g. in a context of
demonstration, teaching or request. Communication is supported by ostensive cues, but at the same time kinematic
patterns of actions could be modulated by the intention to communicate. Here we investigate which kinematic and
gaze features characterize communicative manual acts (actions and gestures), and how these features contribute to
initializing and optimizing the interaction. In two studies, we addressed the following questions: Which features
characterize communicative acts? What is the role of these features in signaling the intent to communicate? Do these
features support recognition of a manual act? In the first (production) study, we asked participants to perform pairs

	80

of object-directed actions and representational gestures in either a communicative or non-communicative context.
The acts were video-recorded and kinematic features were extracted using motion capture technology (Kinect). In
the second (comprehension) study, naïve participants rated the communicativeness of the acts and performed a
semantic disambiguation task. We analyzed trial-by-trial correlations between kinematic/ostensive features and the
ratings or task performance. We found that, during production, a communicative context optimizes the balance
between time and visual semantic information presented and elicits increased eye-contact. Our second study found
that while eye-contact is the primary cue for recognizing communicative intent, kinematic modulation enhances
semantic recognition of the act. Our results indicate that eye-contact initiates the communicative interaction, while
this interaction modulates the space-time dimensions of kinematics, optimizing semantic recognition for the
addressee.
B – 68
EFFECTS OF AGENCY AND INTENTIONALITY ON AVERSIVE LEARNING FROM OTHERS
Irem Undeger – Karolinska Institute; Armita Golkar – Karolinska Institute; Philip Pärnamets – Karolinska Institute;
Andreas Olsson – Karolinska Institute
Previous research shows that harms inflicted by others are influenced by attributions of intentionality and agency. For
example, intentional, as compared to unintentional, harms are perceived as being more painful, less moral, and their
impact is overestimated. Learning about the cause of harm is essential for our survival, but it is unknown how social
information, such as the intentionality of the harm received, affects the learning of threat. Here, we used a modified
Pavlovian fear-conditioning paradigm to investigate how this type of social information regulates aversive learning to
categorical stimuli predictive of aversive events (mild-shocks). Two alleged co-participants delivered shocks to the
participant either knowingly (intentionally), or unknowingly (unintentionally). Shocks were delivered after the
co/participants chose between one out of two neutral stimuli. Intentionality of the co-participant affected both
evaluations and psychophysiological responses: when shocks were perceived as intentionally versus unintentionally
caused, participants reported greater anger, willingness to retaliate, and displayed greater pupil dilation throughout
the course of learning. Our results shed light on how social emotional learning from and about others is regulated
based on social context; namely the intentionality of the person causing harm. Importantly, our results goes beyond
previous research on mens rea and moral judgments by describing how intentionality enhances basic aversive
learning to neutral stimuli. Our findings will be discussed in light of their reliance on brain systems known to be
involved in aversive learning and mentalizing.
B – 69
SOCIAL LEARNING AND ADAPTIVE RISK-TAKING IN ADOLESCENCE: EVIDENCE FROM BRAIN AND
BEHAVIOR
Jorien Van Hoorn – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Ethan M. McCormick – University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill; Eva H. Telzer – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Adolescence is a time of increased social sensitivity, which is often related to heightened levels of health-risk
behaviors. However, learning from social information may also support adaptive decisions in a risk-taking context.
The present fMRI study sought to examine how social learning is related to adolescent risk-taking. Participants (age
12-16; N = 31) played the novel Social Analogue Risk Task (SART), which measures participant’s willingness to knock
on doors in order to earn points. With each knock the facial expression of the house’s resident morphed from neutral
to somewhat angrier. If the resident got too angry and slammed the door, all points were lost. Because the
increments from neutral to angry were variable, learning from this social information is beneficial to make adaptive
risky decisions (i.e., cash-out before a slam). We employed HLM to estimate how adolescents adjusted their risky
choices based on social learning from varying anger increments and the outcome of the previous trial. Participants
took more risks when resident’s faces started out more neutral (B = 0.533, p < .001), and less risk if the previous
trial was a slam (B = -0.654, p < .001). Empirical Bayes estimates of social learning were correlated with total points
earned (r = .879, p < .001), indicating a relation with adaptive risky decisions. At the neural level, adolescents with
higher social learning showed more activation in social brain areas, including dmPFC, IFG and pSTS, during decisions
to cash-out. These findings are related to social experiences based on daily diaries.
B – 70
GLOBAL BRAIN DYNAMICS DURING SOCIAL EXCLUSION PREDICT SUBSEQUENT BEHAVIORAL
CONFORMITY
Nick Wasylyshyn – US Army Research Labs; Brett Hemenway – University of Pennsylvania; Javier O. Garcia – US
Army Research Labs; Christopher N. Cascio – University of Pennsylvania; Matthew B. O'Donnell – University of
Pennsylvania; C. Raymond Bingham – University of Michigan; Bruce G. Simons-Morton – Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health & Human Development; Jean M. Vettel – US Army Research Labs; Emily B. Falk –
University of Pennsylvania

	

81

Individuals react differently to social experiences; for example, people who are more sensitive to negative social
experiences, such as being excluded, may be more likely to adapt their behavior to fit in with others. We examined
whether functional brain connectivity during social exclusion in the fMRI scanner can be used to predict subsequent
conformity to peer norms. Adolescent males (N = 57) completed a two-part study on teen driving risk: a social
exclusion task (Cyberball) during an fMRI session and a subsequent driving simulator session in which they drove
alone and in the presence of a peer who expressed risk-averse or risk-accepting driving norms. We computed the
difference in functional connectivity between social exclusion and social inclusion in two brain networks, one
previously associated with mentalizing (medial prefrontal cortex, temporoparietal junction, precuneus, temporal pole)
and another with social pain (anterior cingulate cortex, anterior insula). Using cross-validated machine learning, fMRI
network connectivity during exclusion predicts the extent of conformity to peer pressure during driving in the
subsequent experimental session. These findings extend our understanding of how global neural dynamics guide
social behavior, revealing functional network activity that captures individual differences.
B – 71
NEURAL FREQUENCY ABNORMALITIES IN SOCIAL BRAIN REGIONS OF AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER
Sophie E. Wohltjen – Dartmouth College; Monika S. Mellem – National Institutes of Health; Stephen J. Gotts –
National Institutes of Health; Avniel Ghuman – University of Pittsburgh; Alex Martin – National Institutes of Health
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are developmental disorders characterized by impairments in social and
communication abilities. Recent MRI studies have found functional and structural differences in ASD in areas of the
social network of the brain, such as anterior cingulate cortex, temporoparietal junction, and ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (Patriquin, et al., 2016). However, it is not yet well understood how intrinsic rhythmic neural activity across a
wide spectrum is affected within the social network in ASD. We investigated how the spatial organization of intrinsic
frequencies compared between the ASD and typically developing (TD) brains. We examined spectral power between
1-50 Hz using source-localized, task-independent magnetoencephalography (MEG) recordings (ASD n=18, TD n=14).
Standardized power maps computed separately for seven frequency bands (delta – gamma) delineated regions of
peak power in each band. A 2x7 ANOVA was used to examine Group X Frequency Band comparisons at each brain
region, FDR corrected (q=0.05). The results revealed crossover interactions (p<0.002) in regions implicated in social
processing such that ASD and TD subjects differed most significantly in the low (delta, theta) and high (high beta,
gamma) frequencies. This suggests that abnormal processing in these regions of the social network could be related
to an intrinsic frequency imbalance in the ASD brain. References: Patriquin, M., DeRamus, T., Libero, L., Laird, A., &
Kana, R. (2016). Neuroanatomical and neurofunctional markers of social cognition in autism spectrum disorder.
Human Brain Mapping, 37(11), 3957-3978.
B – 72
THE ROLE OF THE DORSAL ANTERIOR INSULA IN SEXUAL RISK: EVIDENCE FROM AN EROTIC
GO/NOGO TASK AND REAL-LIFE RISK TAKING
Feng Xue – University of Southern California; Vita Droutman – University of Southern California; Emily E. BarkeleyLevenson – Hofstra University; Benjamin J. Smith – University of Southern California; Gui Xue – Beijing Normal
University; Zhong-Lin Lu – Ohio State University; Antoine Bechara – University of Southern California; Lynn C. Miller
– University of Southern California; Stephen J. Read – University of Southern California
Background: The insula plays an important role in decision-making. Most relevant here, it has been proposed that the
dorsal anterior insular cortex (dAIC) plays a central role in a salience network that is responsible for switching
between the default mode network and the executive control network. However, the insula’s role in risky sexual
decision-making has not yet been studied. Purpose: To investigate the role of various subregions of the insula in the
risky sexual decision-making process. We particularly focused on the role of dAIC in response inhibition and executive
control. Methods: Eighty-five 18-30 year-old sexually active men who have sex with men (MSM) performed an erotic
Go/NoGo task while in an MRI scanner. Participants’ real-life sexual risk taking (frequency of condomless anal
intercourse over the past 90 days) was then correlated with their neural activity during the task. Results: We found
greater activity in bilateral anterior insular cortex (both dorsal and ventral) on contrasts with stronger motivational
information (attractive naked male pictures versus pictures of clothed, middle-aged females) and on contrasts
requiring greater response inhibition (NoGo versus Go). We also found that activity in the right dAIC was negatively
correlated with participants’ real-life sexual risk taking. Conclusions: The right dAIC has been proposed as a hub
region that controls when the executive control system comes online. Decreased right dAIC activity may reduce the
likelihood that the executive control network will come online when individuals are faced with situations requiring
inhibitory control and thus lead them to make more risky choices.

	82

Poster Session C
Saturday, March 18, 10:15 – 11:45 AM
C – 1 *SANS Poster Award winner*
A WINDOW INTO THE MIND: A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO MEASURING EMOTIONS IN
RESPONSE TO NATURALISTIC STIMULI
Jin Hyun Cheong – Dartmouth College; Eshin Jolly – Dartmouth College; Luke J. Chang – Dartmouth College
A fundamental limitation of emotion research is the lack of objective measures of feeling states. Self-report is
currently the gold-standard, but introspective approaches can alter the nature of the emotional experience.
Psychophysiological measures are neither sensitive nor specific to measuring a wide range of feeling states and
manual coding of facial expressions has been virtually impossible for long temporal recordings. This has led emotion
research to focus on controlled laboratory paradigms to ensure proper emotion elicitation. Consequently, we know
very little about how emotions are experienced outside the laboratory. Here we use a computer vision algorithm to
measure facial expressions in response to naturalistic stimuli (4 x 45 minute episodes of Friday Night Lights) using
high-speed cameras (120 Hz). We use a dynamic measure of intersubject synchrony to identify when participants are
experiencing similar emotions (e.g., joy, contempt, surprise, frustration, anger, etc.). This metric not only allows us
to identify when groups of participants are having similar emotional experiences, but also allows us to predict
individual affective impressions of individual characters or events. We used a linear model to transform average facial
responses of joy to viewing each character into a single predicted affective rating. This approach was able to
successfully recover the degree to which each participant liked and wanted to be friends with each character. We
believe this technique will provide a paradigm shift into studying the dynamics of emotion using naturalistic stimuli.
C – 2 *SANS Poster Award winner*
NEGATIVE BIASES IN SOCIAL PROCESSING CORRELATE WITH CURRENT SELF-ESTEEM AND FUTURE
CHANGES IN DEPRESSION
Alex W. daSilva – Dartmouth College; Jeremy F. Huckins – Dartmouth College; William M. Kelley – Dartmouth
College; Todd F. Heatherton – Dartmouth College
Low self-esteem individuals tend to view themselves in a negative light, and in social contexts assume others form
negative impressions of them. Moreover, a strong link exists between low self-esteem and depression. Little is
known, however, regarding how differences in self-esteem relate to processing social cues. Accordingly, we
conducted behavioral and neuroimaging studies to provide insight into how individual differences in processing of
social material may manifest and contribute to future symptoms of depression. In the behavioral study (N=69), we
used a memory paradigm and found a linear relationship between memory for negative social images and selfesteem; specifically, those with lower self-esteem remembered more negative social images. This effect was not
observed for neutral or positive images. Given this unique relationship between self-esteem and negative social
images, a separate but conceptually related imaging study was conducted in which participants (N=99) viewed a
series of diverse naturalistic stimuli. Consistent with the behavioral study, the fMRI results identified a relationship
between negative social images and self-esteem. Specifically, a region of the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex, a
region implicated in social affect and depression, demonstrated a linear relationship between activity for negative
social images and self-esteem. Furthermore, when controlling for levels of depression at time of scan, activity to
negative social images predicted changes in depression scores over time. The overall pattern of results provides
insight into how a bias toward negative social material may contribute to the relation between low self-esteem and
depression and how that relation emerges over time.
C – 3 *SANS Poster Award winner*
NEURAL PREDICTION OF POPULATION INFORMATION SHARING BEHAVIOR RELATES TO DAILY LIFE
INFORMATION SEEKING
Bruce P. Dore – University of Pennsylvania; Christin Scholz – University of Pennsylvania; Elisa Baek – University of
Pennsylvania; Matthew B. O'Donnell – University of Pennsylvania; Emily B. Falk – University of Pennsylvania
The act of sharing information is fundamental to society, but our understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying
information sharing is incomplete. We built hierarchical predictive models that used brain responses to news articles
to predict sharing of these articles in the broader population of readers. We found 1) there were large person to
person differences in the predictive capacity of brain valuation responses, and 2) these differences tracked with the
rest of the brain, such that people with highly predictive ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) responses tended to
show predictive responses across a global brain network encompassing regions associated with valuation, selfrelevance, social cognition, and controlled attention. In a test of the source of these differences, we saw 3) that
vmPFC predictive capacity was related to engagement with similar articles in daily life, in that frequent readers

	

83

tended to show high ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) responses across all articles, whereas infrequent
readers tended to show high vmPFC only to articles that would be heavily shared. These results provide a model of
variability in brain predictive capacity for population sharing behavior and identify person to person differences in
domain familiarity as a psychological source of this variability.
C – 4 *SANS Poster Award winner*
HOW REAL-LIFE HEALTH MESSAGES ENGAGE OUR BRAINS: SHARED PROCESSING OF EFFECTIVE ANTIALCOHOL VIDEOS
Martin A. Imhof – University of Konstanz; Ralf Schmälzle – Michigan State University; Britta Renner – University of
Konstanz; Harald T. Schupp – University of Konstanz
Health communication via mass media is an important strategy when targeting risky drinking, but many questions
remain about how health messages are processed and how they unfold their effects within receivers. Here we
examine how the brains of young adults - a key target group for alcohol prevention - ‘tune in’ to real-life health
prevention messages about risky alcohol use. In a first study, a large sample of authentic public service
announcements (PSAs) targeting the risks of alcohol was characterized using established measures of message
effectiveness. In the main study, we used inter-subject correlation analysis of fMRI data to examine brain responses
to more and less effective PSAs in a sample of young adults. We find that more effective messages command more
similar responses within widespread brain regions, including the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, insulae, and
precuneus. In previous research these regions have been related to narrative engagement, self-relevance, and
attention towards salient stimuli. The present study thus suggests that more effective health prevention messages
have greater ‘neural reach’, i.e. they engage the brains of audience members’ more widely. This work outlines a
promising strategy for assessing the effects of health communication at a neural level.
C – 5 *SANS Poster Award winner*
INTERPERSONAL SYNCHRONISATION AS A MEDIATING MECHANISM IN VICARIOUS FEAR LEARNING
Philip Parnamets – Karolinska Institutet; Lisa Espinosa – Karolinska Institutet; Andreas Olsson – Karolinska Institutet
Vicarious fear learning (learning about threats by observing others) is a crucial survival-related adaptation in humans
and other social species. Surprisingly little is known about its mediating mechanism, and no study has examined this
learning during live interaction in dyads. Rather vicarious fear learning is typically studied by exposing observers to
videos of a demonstrator receiving shocks to one of two stimuli. Here we extended the vicarious fear learning
paradigm to include two naïve participants, each taking turns learning from the other about the value of novel,
previously unseen, stimuli. Previous work has suggested the instructed empathy with a model can enhance the
learning outcomes of the observer. We extended this work by investigating if physiological synchronisation would
predict learning outcomes. We used recurrence quantification analysis to assess the degree of similarity in skin
conductance signals between the observer and the model during the learning phase. First, we demonstrated the
generalisation of the standard vicarious fear learning paradigm to a setting involving live observers and models.
Second, importantly, we found that degree of synchronisation positively predicted the strength of the conditioned
fear response of the observer during the subsequent testing phase. Our results suggest that actively modelling the
physiological responses of another might be an important path towards successful learning outcomes, and that
interpersonal synchrony may function as embodied empathy in vicarious fear learning.
C – 6 *SANS Poster Award winner*
USING BRAIN CONNECTIVITY PATTERNS TO INVESTIGATE REGULATORY MECHANISMS UNDERLYING
POSITIVE ILLUSIONS
Michael H. Parrish – University of California, Los Angeles; Janine M. Dutcher – Carnegie Mellon University; Keely M.
Muscatell – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Tristen K. Inagaki – University of Pittsburgh; Michael R. Irwin –
University of California, Los Angeles; Naomi I. Eisenberger – University of California, Los Angeles
Healthy adults possess positive illusions or biased positive evaluations of themselves, whereas depressed individuals
hold more-realistic self-views. Although behavioral evidence has established this basic relationship, much less
research has explored the underlying neural mechanisms that may contribute to these positive illusions. Additionally,
little research has examined the early-life variables, such as maternal care, that could shape these underlying
neurocognitive strategies resulting in biased perceptions. To examine the neural mechanisms that might underlie
positive illusions, we scanned individuals (N = 50) receiving social evaluative feedback and examined a regulatory
mechanism that might play a role in amplifying the reward value of positive feedback. Specifically, we explored
functional connectivity between two regions—the VLPFC, involved in affective regulation, and the VS, involved in
reward processing—which together might be involved in amplifying reward signals in response to feedback. Results
demonstrated that individuals lower in self-reported depression showed increased connectivity between VLPFC and
VS during evaluation, particularly in response to positive and neutral feedback. This suggests that non-depressed
individuals may be naturally enhancing reward-related activity to positive and neutral feedback—one possible

	84

mechanism underlying positive illusions. Interestingly, individuals higher in maternal care also showed increased
connectivity between VLPFC and VS during evaluation, particularly in response to positive and neutral feedback. This
highlights a possible early-life mechanism that may shape the tendency to enhance reward-related activity to positive
feedback. These results highlight a potential regulatory mechanism instantiated in neural connectivity patterns and
point to an ontogenetic basis for sustained positive illusions across the lifespan.
C – 7 *SANS Poster Award winner*
A NEURAL PROPAGATION SYSTEM: NEUROCOGNITIVE AND PREFERENCE SYNCHRONY IN
INFORMATION SHARERS AND THEIR RECEIVERS
Christin Scholz – University of Pennsylvania; Elisa C. Baek – University of Pennsylvania; Bruce Dore – University of
Pennsylvania; Matthew B. O'Donnell – University of Pennsylvania; Emily B. Falk – University of Pennsylvania
Interpersonal communication shapes and catalyzes the spread of information through populations. We propose that
propagation between information sharers and receivers is driven by neural synchrony in brain systems associated
with valuation, self-reflection, and social cognition. Here, we used fMRI to measure neural activity as well as contentrelated preferences in information sharers while they were exposed to news articles and in receivers exposed to
sharer-composed messages about the same articles. We observed significant neurocognitive sharer-receiver
synchrony within the hypothesized regions of interest, but not within other brain areas associated with saliency and
attention. This effect held irrespective of the news article content, sharer, and receiver characteristics, suggesting
that synchrony is a characteristic of human communication rather than a by-product of the situation in which the
interaction occurs. We further show that the observed synchrony is not explained by exposure to identical content
such as when sharers transmit a preview of the original content together with a personal message. Specifically, we
observed synchrony only for communication partners, not randomly paired individuals who were exposed to the
same content but did not interact. Finally, the extent of neurocognitive synchrony covaried with the successful
propagation of content-related preferences. Together, our findings suggest that sharer-receiver synchrony, in a
neural propagation system consisting of regions associated with valuation, self-reflection, and social cognition,
supports the interpersonal transmission of information and preferences across contexts. These findings highlight both
core neurocognitive processes relevant to social influence and the spread of ideas, and more fundamental elements
of human communication.
C – 8 *SANS Poster Award winner*
EXPLORING THE CONCEPTUAL AND VISUAL BASES OF WEAPONS BIAS
Benjamin S. Stillerman – New York University; Ryan M. Stolier – New York University; David M. Amodio – New York
University; Jonathan B. Freeman – New York University
Past research on implicit bias reveals a persistent stereotypic association between Blacks and crime, one that is borne
out in racially disparate criminal justice outcomes for Blacks. In the Weapon Identification Task (WIT), a common
priming paradigm, subjects classify target objects as tools or guns after being primed by Black and White faces, and
subjects typically misclassify tools as guns when they are preceded by Black faces. However, the mechanism by
which the race of the prime influences responses is still debated, and has implications for developing bias reduction
interventions. The traditional view is that conceptual associations between Blacks and crime directly facilitate
stereotype-congruent responses. Alternatively, this may be mediated by perceptual processes, such that those
conceptual associations bias the visual representation of a tool to be more similar to that of a gun when preceded by
a Black face. To address this, in a preliminary fMRI sample (N = 22), subjects passively viewed guns and tools in
isolation and subsequently completed the WIT. Using multi-voxel pattern analysis, we observed greater neuralpattern similarity between Black-primed tools and isolated guns than between White-primed tools and isolated guns.
We observed this effect in the left orbitofrontal cortex, a region implicated in top-down visual predictions (including
stereotype-based expectations) that modulate the ventral-visual stream, suggesting a possible interplay of conceptual
and visual contributions to weapon bias effects. Theoretical implications for models of social cognition, stereotyping,
and the emerging field of social vision are discussed.
C – 9 *SANS Poster Award winner*
TRIPLE THREAT: BEHAVIORAL INHIBITION, FRONTAL EEG ASYMMETRY, AND ATTENTION BIAS TO
THREAT AS A HIGH-RISK MARKER PROFILE FOR SOCIAL ANXIETY
Alicia Vallorani – The Pennsylvania State University; Nhi K. Thai – The Pennsylvania State University; Bradley C.
Taber-Thomas – The Pennsylvania State University; Leigha A. MacNeill – The Pennsylvania State University; Koraly
Pérez-Edgar – The Pennsylvania State University
Social anxiety in childhood has been independently linked to temperament, physiology and attention biases. In
particular, behavioral inhibition (BI) (Schwartz et al., 1999), right frontal EEG asymmetry (Smith et al., 2010) and
attention bias to threat (ABT) (Bar-Haim et al., 2007) all have been linked to increased anxiety. Although research
has shown relationships between BI and asymmetry (Fox et al., 1994), BI and ABT (Pérez-Edgar et al., 2011) and

	

85

ABT and asymmetry (Pérez-Edgar et al., 2013), no study has investigated how all three risk markers may interact to
affect socioemotional profiles. The current study assesses the relations of these risk markers with social anxiety. As
part of an ongoing study, 123 children (ages 9 to 12) screened for BI status (over-sampled such that 42% were high
BI) completed the dot-probe task to assess ABT and provided asymmetry at rest. Both children and parents
completed the DISC-IV, providing information about the child’s level of social anxiety. Results indicated that both
higher levels of BI, F(1, 115) = 18.05, p < .001, and asymmetry, F(1, 115) = 8.13, p = .005, were associated with
greater social anxiety levels. Conversely, ABT alone did not predict higher levels of social anxiety. A three-way
interaction between BI, asymmetry, and ABT revealed that children who were high in BI, right frontal asymmetry,
and ABT showed the highest levels of social anxiety, F(1, 115) = 8.85, p = .004, suggesting that together these
three risk markers may create or designate a particularly high-risk profile.
C – 10
RESTING-STATE CONNECTIVITY OF THE BED NUCLEUS OF THE STRIA TERMINALIS IN CLINICAL
ANXIETY
Gabriella Alvarez – National Institute of Mental Health; Salvatore Torrisi – National Institute of Mental Health;
Christian Grillon – National Institute of Mental Health; Monique Ernst – National Institute of Mental Health
Basic studies in animals implicate the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) in anxiety. Little is known about the
contribution of the BNST to anxiety in humans. The paucity of work stems from the small size of this structure, which
has prevented its valid examination with standard imaging tools. Prior work in our group utilized high resolution
imaging at 7 Tesla to map the resting state functional connectivity (rsFC) of the BNST in healthy subjects. Results
confirmed and extended structural findings in the literature. Assuming a role for the BNST in anxiety, we expect to
identify distinct patterns of BNST rsFC between healthy controls and anxiety patients in this follow-up study. 12
patients with anxiety diagnoses (generalized anxiety and/or social anxiety) and twelve matched healthy subjects
participated in this preliminary analysis of a 10-minute resting state scan. Data collection is ongoing with total N=50
by SANS. We used our publically-available BNST masks to extract averaged time series. Within-group analyses
replicated previous findings showing strong BNST connectivity with the medial PFC, dorsal amygdala, medial head of
caudate and precuneus in both groups. The between-group t-test analysis revealed that patients displayed greater
connectivity of the BNST with the left frontal pole, thalamus and subgenual anterior cingulate. Patients also displayed
weaker rsFC between the BNST and regions of visual cortex. These preliminary findings suggest deviant resting state
BNST connectivity in patients with anxiety in prefrontal and visual cortical regions, which suggests differential
changes in sensory (stimuli-driven) processes vs. self-referential (internally driven) processes.
C – 11
MORAL INTUITIONS ELICIT DISSOCIABLE CORTICAL ACTIVATION
Ori Amir – University of California, Santa Barbara; Richard Huskey – The Ohio State University; James Michael
Mangus – University of California, Santa Barbara; Reed Swanson – University of Southern California; Andrew Gordon
– University of Southern California; Peter Khooshabeh – US Army Research Laboratory; Rene Weber – University of
California, Santa Barbara
Moral Foundation Theory (MFT; Graham, et al., 2012) holds that moral judgments are primarily driven by a collection
of distinct intuitions about the significance of particular types of moral information. Broadly speaking, moral intuitions
can be divided into individualizing (care, fairness, liberty) and binding (loyalty, authority, purity) domains. Past
neuroimaging studies typically focus on a single moral foundation (e.g. harm) or otherwise treat morality as a
uniform, foundation-general faculty (e.g., Greene et al., 2001; Moll, et al. 2001). Among studies that do consider
different types of moral content, these differences rarely map onto the particular set of intuitive foundations
proposed by MFT (e.g. Shenhav & Greene, 2014). A total of 60 participants (20 self-identified Democrats,
Republicans, Unaffiliated) underwent fMRI with a multi-band accelerated EPI sequence
(http://www.cmrr.umn.edu/multiband/) while evaluating recently-validated single-sentence vignettes about
individuals acting immorally (Clifford et al., 2015). Using the advanced pulse sequence and optimized stimuli, first
analyses provide strong evidence that different moral intuitions elicit neural activity in dissociable networks.
Specifically, networks consisting of the temporoparietal junction, temporal pole, precuneus, posterior cingulate
cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are
selectively recruited when contrasting binding versus individualizing domains. MVPA analyses and group comparisons
presented at the SANS conference provide further insights into whether morality is, as predicted by MFT, processed
by foundation-specific networks in the brain (Parkinson et al., 2011) and to what extent Clifford’s et al. (2015)
vignettes can be considered a localizer for moral intuition networks.
C – 12
THE EFFECTS OF POSITIVE EMOTION ON FEAR CONDITIONING
Kathryn Bach – University of Denver; Daniel S. Lumian – University of Denver; Christian Waugh – Wake Forest

	86

University; Amber Swaim – University of Denver; Detre Godinez – University of Denver; Lisa Correia – University of
Denver; Daniel Garcia – University of Denver; Kateri McRae – University of Denver
Fear conditioning has been extensively utilized to understand the mechanisms of associative learning during fear
acquisition, extinction and retention (here, after a 24-hour delay). Previous research provides evidence that positive
emotion is a successful tool for regulating stress. However, research has not yet investigated whether the
advantageous effects of positive emotion can be observed in a fear-conditioning paradigm (during extinction and
retention). Forty-three participants underwent fear conditioning using an electric stimulation as the US and four
colored shapes as CS’s. To manipulate positive emotion during extinction and retention, shapes were superimposed
on either positive (beaches, mountains) or neutral (rooftops, alleys) background photos. Galvanic skin response
(GSR) was collected to index fear responses during acquisition, extinction and retention. A 2 x 2 factorial design
resulted in four conditions of interest: CS+P (reinforced at 80% with a positive background), CS+N (reinforced at
80% with a neutral background), CS-P (not reinforced with a positive background) and CS-N (not reinforced with a
neutral background). Preliminary analyses indicate successful conditioning (greater anticipatory GSR for both CS+
compared with CS-) during acquisition and extinction. In addition, a main effect of valence (greater GSR for neutral
than positive conditions) was observed during acquisition and extinction. Therefore, both conditioning and valence
impacted expression of fear during extinction, whereas only valence impacted expression of fear after a 24-hour
delay.
C – 13
AROUSAL AND ATTRACTION: A NEUROBIOLOGICAL APPROACH
Lane Beckes – Bradley University; Danielle Lewis – Bradley University; Casey Grage – Bradley University; Anthony Le
– Bradley University
Arousal-attraction links first gained widespread attention when Dutton and Aron (1974) found that fear-based arousal
increased attraction to a confederate. This effect was alternatively explained as misattribution of the arousal,
facilitation of the dominant response, and negative reinforcement learning. Contrary to negative reinforcement
explanations, high intensity exercise also produces this effect (Allen, et al., 1989) indicating no need for a
threatening or punishing stimulus. Neurobiology may offer a different explanation. Anaerobic exercise releases
endogenous opioids, which reduce pain and increase feelings of reward (e.g., Le Merrer, et al., 2009). Thus, the
natural release of opioids is an alternative explanation that should be investigated. In this study, pain threshold and
heart rate were taken at baseline and after running. Participants ran at either a high intensity or moderate intensity
and heart rate and pain threshold were re-measured at variable intervals after running to tease out the physiological
response curves of each. Heart rate corresponds to arousal, whereas pain threshold corresponds to endogenous
opioid activity. It was predicted that pain threshold would significantly predict attractiveness ratings in the high
intensity condition, but not in the low intensity condition, whereas heart rate would not predict attractiveness ratings
in either condition. An ANCOVA and follow-up analyses supported the opioid hypotheses over the arousal hypothesis.
This challenges the classic explanations for the link between arousal and attraction. Understanding neurobiology may
lead to reinterpretations of classic social psychological findings and lead to new understandings of social behavior.
C – 14
THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL STATUS ON HONESTY: GENDER MAKES A DIFFERENCE
Philip R. Blue – Peking University; Jie Hu – Peking University; Lusha Zhu – Peking University; Xiaolin Zhou – Peking
University
Previous research on the effects of social status on ethical behavior is divided: one line of research suggests that
high status individuals are more likely to engage in unethical behavior, whereas a second line of research suggests
the opposite. Given the strong effect of gender on both status-seeking behavior and unethical behavior such as
dishonesty, here we attempt to bridge the gap in previous literature by systematically testing the effects of gender
and social status on honesty behavior. To do so, participant social status was manipulated using rankings from a
math competition (i.e., status-inducing task), after which participants were paired with partners of different social
status before playing several rounds of the Dictator Game (i.e., DG; baseline social preference) and the Message
Game (i.e., MG; honesty concerns). While both male and female participants evidenced equal baseline social
preferences for low and high status partners, male participants were less honest with high status than low status
partners, whereas female participants were equally honest with high and low status partners. Computational
modeling showed that males were more self-interested when playing MG with high status than low status partners.
Post-experiment questionnaire also suggested that male participants’ dishonesty with high status partners was both
strategic and intentional. In general, these findings suggest that gender may play a crucial role in the effects of social
status on honesty and, in particular, that males are more willing to act in ways that increase their own status at the
cost of higher ranked others.

	

87

C – 15
REGULATION OF CRAVING AND WEIGHT LOSS IN BARIATRIC SURGERY PATIENTS
Rebecca G. Boswell – Yale University; Godfrey Pearlson – Yale University & Hartford Hospital Interdisciplinary Center
on Obesity Research; Michael Stevens – Hartford Hospital Interdisciplinary Center on Obesity Research; Pavlos
Papasavas – Hartford Hospital Interdisciplinary Center on Obesity Research; Darren Tishler – Hartford Hospital
Interdisciplinary Center on Obesity Research; Janet Ng – Hartford Hospital Interdisciplinary Center on Obesity
Research; Andrea Stone – Hartford Hospital Interdisciplinary Center on Obesity Research; Kasey O'Neil – Hartford
Hospital Interdisciplinary Center on Obesity Research; Hedy Kober – Yale University
Bariatric surgery, which alters the stomach, is the most effective treatment for severe obesity. Although some
patients lose ~80% of their excess weight, ~80% regain weight 1-year post-surgery, and little is known about
predictors of post-surgical weight loss. One candidate is cognitive regulation of craving, which attenuates neural
responses to food- and drug-related cues, and predicts successful treatment outcomes for addictions. However, no
previous work has investigated obese individuals’ regulation of craving in response to food cues and/or whether it
might be associated with weight loss. We investigated changes in neural activity from pre- to 1-year post-bariatric
surgery using the Regulation of Craving (ROC) task (N=60). On each trial, participants were presented with
photographs of high-calorie foods and instructed to (1) LOOK: “respond naturally,” or (2) LATER: “think of long-term
negative consequences of consuming the food.” Then, they rated their craving. Imaging data were collected using
multi-band acquisition sequence on a Siemens Skyra wide-bore 3T scanner (TR=475ms, 3x3x3voxels). Preliminary
analyses show that during regulation (LATERPOST>LATERPRE; BMIPRE=45.12±6.43; BMIPOST=32.92±5.68), there
was greater recruitment of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) after bariatric surgery compared to pre-surgery. Whole
brain correlations revealed that those with the greatest increase in IFG activation during regulation
(LATERPOST>LATERPRE) and the greatest decrease in striatal activation while simply looking at pictures
(LOOKPOST>LOOKPRE) lost the most weight at 1-year-follow-up. These results demonstrate that neural activity
during regulation of craving is associated with bariatric surgery outcomes. Our findings have important clinical and
public health implications and applications.
C – 16
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THEORY OF MIND AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING ACROSS THE
LIFESPAN
Elisabeth E.F. Bradford – University of Kent; Victoria E.A. Brunsdon – University of Kent; Heather Ferguson –
University of Kent
To successfully interact with other people, it is important to be able to infer information about their mental states –
what they may know, believe, or think at any given time. This ability is often referred to as possession of a ‘Theory of
Mind’ (ToM). Prior research has demonstrated a strong relationship between ToM abilities and Executive Functioning
(EF), particularly in young children. However, less is known about the relationship between ToM and EF in adulthood,
although it has been shown that during healthy ageing, a decline in both social cognition and EF abilities is often
reported. The research presented here sought to explore how the relationship between ToM and EF may change
across the lifespan, and how different EF components may be particularly important for successful engagement of
ToM at different ages. Participants aged 18-80 years-old completed a battery of ToM tasks assessing different
aspects of ToM (such as perspective-taking and emotion recognition) and EF abilities (including inhibition, cognitive
flexibility, working memory, and planning). Results revealed differences in how younger and older participants utilize
their ToM abilities; older adults were significantly slower in their response times in ToM tasks compared to younger
adults. Additionally, older adults made significantly more errors in their responses than younger adults, suggesting
difficulty in spontaneously and efficiently computing the mental states of other people. Results highlighted a key role
of inhibition and working memory in predicting successful engagement in higher-level ToM, suggesting a critical
relationship between ToM and EF continues across the lifespan.
C – 17
THE SOUND AND THE FURY: LATE POSITIVE POTENTIAL IS SENSITIVE TO SOUND AFFECT
Darin R. Brown – University of New Mexico; James F. Cavanagh – University of New Mexico
Emotion is an emergent construct of multiple primitive sub-processes. EEG is uniquely sensitive to real-time neural
computations, and thus is an excellent tool to study the construction of emotion. This series of studies aimed to
probe the mechanistic contribution of the Late Positive Potential (LPP) to multi-modal emotion perception.
Experiment 1 revealed valence differences in the LPP time range for affective sound processing, as well as valence
differences in the early LPP time range for visual images paired with sounds. Experiment 2 manipulated this audiovisual enhancement by altering the valence pairings with congruent (e.g. positive audio + positive visual) or
conflicting emotional pairs (e.g. positive audio + negative visual). Negative visual stimuli evoked larger early LPP
amplitudes than positive visual stimuli, regardless of sound pairing. However, time frequency analyses revealed
significant midfrontal theta-band power differences between conflicting and congruent stimuli pairs suggesting very

	88

early (~500ms) realization of thematic fidelity violations. Interestingly, LPP modulations were reflective of the
congruency of the stimuli pairs, whereby LPPs for positive pictures are attenuated by the pairing with a negative
sound. Together, these findings suggest that enhanced parietal activity for affective valence is modality-independent
and sensitive to complex affective processes. Furthermore, these findings suggest that altered neural activities for
affective visual stimuli are enhanced by concurrent affective sounds, paving the way towards an understanding of the
construction of multi-modal affective experience.
C – 18
THE MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM ACROSS THE LIFESPAN AND ITS ROLE IN SOCIAL COGNITION
Victoria EA Brunsdon – University of Kent; Elisabeth EF Bradford – University of Kent; Heather J. Ferguson –
University of Kent
The human mirror neuron system may have an important role in social cognition. Difficulties in social cognitive
abilities have been reported with increasing age. However, the mirror neuron system and its relationship with social
cognitive abilities have not yet been investigated in healthy aging. The current study used sensorimotor mu
desynchronization (composed of alpha and low beta activity) as an EEG marker of the human mirror neuron system.
Participants aged 18 to 86-years-old completed a hand movement observation task during EEG recording. Firstly,
participants completed a 2-minute resting-state EEG as a reference period and, secondly, watched different video
clips that depicted either a static hand or various hand actions, such as locking a door or clicking fingers. To measure
social cognitive abilities, participants completed a self-other perspective-taking task, a theory of mind task and an
empathy task. Sensorimotor mu desynchronization across the pre-motor cortex, motor cortex and supplementary
motor area was correlated with age. In addition, statistical models examined how sensorimotor mu desynchronization
is related to individual differences in self-other perspective-taking, theory of mind and empathy abilities. Therefore,
this study reports the relationship between the mirror neuron system and social cognitive abilities in healthy aging.
C – 19
COGNITIVE CONTROL AS A BRIDGE BETWEEN BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR: LINKING NEUROTRANSMITTERMEDIATED INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN COGNITIVE CONTROL TO REAL-WORLD ACADEMIC GOAL
PURSUIT
Rebecca Calcott – University of Oregon; Jason Hubbard – University of Oregon; Elliot T. Berkman – University of
Oregon
Linking real-world behaviors with their underlying neural mechanisms is challenging because the two are studied
using vastly different methods. Cognitive control is a useful construct for bridging this brain-behavior gap, because its
neural mechanisms are well-characterized and it has clear relevance for real-world behaviors. We investigated the
real-world consequences of stable versus flexible cognitive control, which are mediated by neural levels of dopamine
(DA) and norepinephrine (NE), by testing whether DA- and NE-mediated influences on cognitive control predict
performance on both a lab task and academic behavior. Subjects (target N=100) completed an attention shifting task
to measure individual differences in the stability/flexibility of cognitive control while pupil size and eye blink rate
(EBR), indices of NE and striatal DA respectively, were collected. Next, subjects completed an internet search task to
assess flexibility (switching between subtasks) and distractibility (i.e. instability; phone checking, off-task website
visits). Subjects then completed daily questionnaires measuring flexibility, distractibility, and task completion as they
pursued academic goals. A pilot study (N=61) found a negative relationship between EBR and flexibility on the
attention shifting task, suggesting that lower tonic DA levels are related to increased flexibility. Planned analyses will
determine whether neurotransmitter-mediated individual differences on this task predict flexibility/distractibility on
the internet search task, and whether this relationship mediates the connection between cognitive control and realworld goal pursuit behaviors. This study will clarify the role of DA and NE in cognitive control and establish a
framework that leverages cognitive control to link low-level neural mechanisms with real-world behaviors.
C – 20
ROLE OF THE AMYGDALA IN DECEPTION DETECTION
Elizabeth Castle – University of California, Los Angeles; Saskia Giebl – University of California, Los Angeles; Matthew
D. Lieberman – University of California, Los Angeles; Shelley E. Taylor – University of California, Los Angeles
Previous neuroscience research has demonstrated an association between the amygdala and trait-level evaluations of
other’s un/trustworthiness (Adolphs, Tranel, & Damasio, 1998) (Todorov, Baron, & Oosterhof, 2008). It is less clear
however, whether this relationship extends beyond the trait-level to offer any advantage in discerning real-time
untrustworthy behavior (Castle, Eisenberger, Seeman, Moons, Boggero, Grinblatt, & Taylor, 2012). To more directly
address this question, we had participants view short video clips of live investment pitches involving real money, and
were asked to judge whether video-targets had been truthful or deceptive in their promise to return their partner’s
investment. Based on our a priori hypothesis regarding the involvement of the amygdala in deception detection, we
began by conducting a preliminary region of interest (ROI) analysis to address this question using an anatomically

	

89

defined bilateral amygdala ROI. We conducted a hierarchical regression analysis using percent signal change
extracted from an anatomically defined amygdala ROI to see if task-related amygdala activity predicted average
deception detection accuracy. For the right amygdala, the results show that our model explained a significant amount
of the variance in deception detection accuracy, (F(2,18)=4.395, p=.028, R-squared=.328, R-squared
adjusted=.253), and that right amygdala activation during the investment task predicted average deception detection
accuracy (Beta=.437, t(20)=2.2, p=.041), over and above the non-social control task (Beta=.279, t(20)=1.4, ns).
There was no effect present in the left amydala. These promising preliminary analyses suggest that right amygdala
activation may serve as an internal cue to the deceptive behavior of others.
C – 21
AWARENESS OF THE WEIGHT CONTROL GOAL MODULATES FOOD-CUE REACTIVITY IN DIETERS
Pin-Hao A. Chen – Dartmouth College; William M. Kelley – Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton – Dartmouth
College
To be successful in self-regulation, individuals need to bring their behaviors in line with their long-term goals
(Heatherton, 2011). For dieters, their long-term goal is to control weight. While dieters are motivated to lose weight,
only few of them achieve this goal or maintain weight loss over the long term (Mann et al., 2007). One factor
influencing dieting success might be the relative activation of weight loss goals. For successful dieters, their weight
loss goals are activated when they are exposed to food cues. In contrast, when unsuccessful dieters are exposed to
food cues, eating enjoyment goals are activated (Stroebe, van Koningsbruggen, Papies, & Aarts, 2013). This study
investigated whether increasing dieters’ awareness of their weight control goal could modulate food-cue reactivity in
brain executive (i.e., frontoparietal) or reward networks. Thirty dieters were randomly assigned to an awareness
group or non-awareness group. Dieters in the awareness group were weighed on a scale and filled out three
questionnaires related to eating behaviors. Those in the non-awareness group filled out three questionnaires
irrelevant to eating behaviors. Both groups then underwent two runs of food-cue reactivity task in the scanner. The
result showed that the awareness group had greater food-cue reactivity than the non-awareness group in the
frontoparietal network, t(28) = 2.987, P = 0.005, but not in the reward network, t(28) = 1.707, P = 0.099. Our
findings suggest that heightening awareness of weight loss goals may boost neural responsivity of brain executive
systems, allowing dieters to stay in control.
C – 22
ALLEGIANCE AND FLEXIBILITY IN NEURAL NETWORKS FORECAST RESPONSES TO HEALTH
MESSAGING
Nicole Cooper – University of Pennsylvania & U.S. Army Research Laboratory; Javier O. Garcia – U.S. Army Research
Laboratory; Steven Tompson – University of Pennsylvania; Matthew B. O'Donnell – University of Pennsylvania; Jean
M. Vettel – U.S. Army Research Laboratory & University of Pennsylvania & University of California; Emily B. Falk –
University of Pennsylvania
Recent work has demonstrated that neuroimaging can predict the effectiveness of persuasive messaging using
functional activation within individual brain regions. We extend this research by examining functional dynamics within
and between brain networks during exposure to antismoking messaging. Forty-five adult smokers underwent
functional magnetic resonance imaging while viewing 80 antismoking images. Participants reported their smoking
behavior and intentions to quit or reduce their smoking at two timepoints, before the scan and one month later.
Utilizing a community detection algorithm, our analysis examined whether sets of brain regions formed consistent
subnetworks (measured as allegiance among regions) or whether regions frequently changed their subnetwork
community (measured as flexibility). We examined allegiance within and between four networks: the default mode,
fronto-parietal control, salience, and subcortical networks. Smokers who showed a larger proportional change in
smoking intentions also demonstrated two changes in network allegiance during message exposure: reduced
allegiance among regions within the default mode network and the fronto-parietal control network. These reductions
in allegiance may reflect differential recruitment of regions in these networks, several nodes of which have been
previously related to behavior change. Finally, flexibility within the whole brain, on average, predicts increased
intention change. These data highlight the value in considering brain network dynamics for understanding message
effectiveness and social processes more broadly.
C – 23
MUDDYING THE WATERS: DOES AUTONOMOUS CHOICE REDUCE CRAVING REGULATION EFFICACY?
Danielle Cosme – University of Oregon; Arian Mobasser – University of Oregon; Dasa Zeithamova – University of
Oregon; Elliot T. Berkman – University of Oregon; Jennifer H. Pfeifer – University of Oregon
The ability to control appetitive urges, such as food cravings, is critical for health and well-being. Cognitive
reappraisal reduces cravings, but the way reappraisal is typically studied in the lab ignores potentially important
factors, such as the choice to regulate. To get closer to how regulation occurs in real life, we conducted an fMRI

	90

study in which 30 participants completed a craving reappraisal task that included a choice to regulate prior to
reappraisal. Participants either actively viewed images of personally-desired foods (look) or reappraised their food
craving (regulate). Participants were told to look or reappraise on half the trials (low autonomy), and freely chose to
look or reappraise on the other half (high autonomy). Unexpectedly, self-reported craving regulation efficacy was
reduced following autonomous choice, even though neural data revealed that it resulted in relatively greater BOLD
signal in regions associated with attention and cognitive control (e.g., ACC, dlPFC, PPC). While seemingly at odds,
these results suggest that making a choice may tax limited attentional and control resources, leaving fewer resources
available for allocation during task implementation (looking or regulating). We will test this hypothesis using MVPA to
classify look and regulate trials and compare classification accuracy for low and high autonomy. If autonomous
choice disrupts resource allocation during implementation, then look and regulate trials should be less robustly
differentiable in the high autonomy condition than in the low autonomy condition. These results extend our
understanding of how autonomous choice affects regulation and have implications for interventions to improve
appetitive regulation.
C – 24
TAKING HYPERSCANNING OUT OF THE LAB: EVIDENCE FROM EEG RESEARCH ON 1400 DYADS DURING
FACE-TO-FACE INTERACTION
Suzanne Dikker – Utrecht University & New York University; Georgios Michalareas – Max Planck Institute for Empirical
Aesthetics; Matthias Oostrik; Hasibe M. Kahraman – New York University & Hunter College; Imke Kruitwagen –
Utrecht University; Shaista Dhanesar – Washington University in St. Louis; Marijn E. Struiksma – Utrecht University;
David Poeppel – Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics
What does it mean to be ‘on the same wavelength’ with another person? When we feel connected or engaged, are
our brains in fact ‘in sync’ in a formal, quantifiable sense? To address this question, we collected EEG and
questionnaire data from 2800 participants at eight different sites (museums and galleries). During the experiment,
pairs of people interacted face-to-face for 7-10 minutes inside The Mutual Wave Machine, an interactive
neurofeedback art/science installation that collects, compares, and visualizes brain-to-brain synchrony between two
people in real time (light patterns reflect moving-window correlations between the two EEG signals; Scientific
American Mind, November/December 2016). The large dataset allowed us to explore the relationship between brainto-brain synchrony and character/relationship traits as well as emotional states. Findings from 700 EEG recordings,
matched for experimental parameters and context, show that pairs with more empathetic personalities (Interpersonal
Reactivity Index, Davis 1980) also exhibited higher brain-to-brain synchrony, and the same was true for pairs who
felt more connected to each other. Further, brain-to-brain synchrony increased throughout the recording session but only if dyads were explicitly told that the light patterns they saw reflected their brain-to-brain synchrony, or if
pairs reported to be more focused at the end of their session. These findings support an account whereby brain-tobrain synchrony is a possible biomarker for successful social interaction, as measured via factors like empathy, focus,
and connectedness. Our interdisciplinary ‘crowdsourcing neuroscience’ approach may provide a promising new
avenue to collect rich datasets pertaining to real-life face-to-face interactions.
C – 25
MULTIMODAL INVESTIGATION OF NEUROBEHAVIORAL DYNAMICS – MINDS – IN EMOTIONCOGNITION INTERACTIONS
Florin Dolcos – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Matthew Moore – University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign; Alexandru Iordan – University of Michigan; Ryan Larsen – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign;
Edward Maclin – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Anthony Singhal – University of Alberta; Brad Sutton –
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Andrew Bagshaw – University of Birmingham; Monica Fabiani – University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Gabriele Gratton – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
This presentation will introduce a novel method for simultaneous tri-modal brain imaging, which is a World Premiere
in the study of brain function. The link between spatial (where) and temporal (when) aspects of the neural correlates
of most psychological phenomena is not clear. Elucidation of this relation requires integration across multiple imaging
modalities and tasks that reliably modulate the engagement of brain networks of interest. Here, we illustrate such an
integration across 3 imaging modalities: one with great spatial resolution (fMRI), one with extraordinary temporal
resolution (ERP), and one combining the spatio-temporal properties of the first two (event-related optical signals,
EROS). Executive tasks with emotional distraction were used, because such dual-task designs can dissociate between
large-scale networks sensitive to cognitive and affective processing. Data from an emotional odd-ball task provided
initial validation of simultaneous bi-modal fMRI-EEG and EEG-EROS recordings, and identified brain responses
consistent with unimodal spatial and temporal evidence. Additional data extended these results to a combined
working memory-emotion regulation (WM-ER) task with emotional distraction, and showed further spatio-temporal
dissociations convergent across the 3 modalities, as a function of WM load (high vs. low), source of distraction
(external vs. internal) and type of ER (spontaneous vs. instructed). Moreover, joint multi-modal analyses identified

	

91

cross-modal links between electrical and hemodynamic responses when coping with emotional distraction. Finally,
further supporting the value of multimodal imaging integration to study brain function, data from simultaneous fMRIERP-EROS recordings validated the feasibility of using EROS as a bridging tool in this tri-modal combination
investigating emotion-cognition interactions.
C – 26
EVALUATING RISK: NEURAL DIFFERENCES IN SEXUALLY RISKY METH USERS DURING GAMBLING
TASK.
Vita Droutman – University of Southern California; Feng Xue – University of Southern California; Emily BarkleyLevenson – Hofstra University; Ben Smith – University of Southern California; Stephen Read – University of Southern
California
We examined the differences in neural processing between methamphetamine users and non-users in a financial
gambling task. 162 men who have sex with men (MSM) participated in this study as part of a larger investigation of
neural correlates of risky sexual decision-making. All participants reported active participation in non-monogamous
sexual relationships. Self-reported number of risky sex occurrences in the past 3 months and substance use history in
prescreening allowed us to recruit participants into 3 groups: safe (51), risky no-meth users (66) and risky meth
users (45). While in an fMRI scanner participants performed the CUPS task, where they had to decide to accept or
refuse a series of mixed gambles. Half of the gambles were risk-equivalent, the other half were split between riskadvantageous and risk-disadvantageous. The task was specifically designed to disentangle activation during gamble
evaluation/decision, action, and feedback phases. Behaviorally we found that meth-users took more risk on riskequivalent gambles than non-users. During gamble evaluation we found reduced BOLD response in meth-users
(compared to safe and risky non-users) in 3 systems involved in decision-making: Impulsive: amygdala, striatum,
Reflective: OFC, ACC, and Insula. Contrasting risky meth users with risky non-meth users yielded similar results:
bilateral insula, OFC, striatum, amygdala, frontal pole. During feedback phase meth-users had reduced activation in
left hippocampus, thalamus, precuneus, lateral occipital cortex, angular gyrus, supramarginal gyrus and in right
posterior cingulate, superior parietal lobule, precentral gyrus. Functional connectivity differences between meth-users
and non-users was also examined.
C – 27
STRESS INCREASES NEURAL SENSITIVITY TO MONETARY AND PROSOCIAL REWARDS
Janine M. Dutcher – Carnegie Mellon University; Julienne E. Bower – University of California, Los Angeles; Naomi I.
Eisenberger – University of California, Los Angeles
Evidence for the relationship between stress and reward sensitivity is mixed, suggesting both inhibitory and
enhancing relationships. However, there is evidence that stress can enhance reward sensitivity for different reward
types. Chronically stressed rats show a stronger anticipatory response to a basic reward, sucrose, than non-stressed
rats (van der Harst et al., 2003). The tend-and-befriend model suggests that individuals under stress, particularly
women, will often care for and affiliate with others (Taylor et al., 2000). Thus, we conducted an fMRI study to
investigate the relationship between perceived stress and neural sensitivity to two different reward types: monetary
reward and charitable giving. 21 female participants (average age=55.5 years) reported their perceived stress levels
over the prior 4 weeks and completed a reward task in the scanner. In the reward task, participants completed 3 trial
types: the opportunity to receive money, the opportunity to donate money to a charity, and control trials in which no
money was exchanged. We then completed ROI analyses on the ventral striatum (VS), a key region in the neural
reward network. Results show that the charitable condition (vs. control) and the monetary reward condition (vs.
control) led to greater neural activity in the VS. Moreover, those who reported higher perceived stress showed
greater VS activity to monetary reward (vs. control) and charitable giving (vs. control). These findings suggest that,
in women, higher perceived stress levels are associated with greater neural reward sensitivity to both prosocial and
monetary rewards, suggesting implications for understanding how stress affects behavior.
C – 28
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SCHIZOPHRENIA POLYGENIC RISK AND NEURAL CIRCUITRY DURING
EMOTION PERCEPTION
Ilvana Dzafic – The University of Queensland; Hana Burianova – Swansea University; Sathish Periyasamy – The
University of Queensland; Bryan Mowry – The University of Queensland
In this study, we investigated the association of schizophrenia polygenic risk on functional brain networks during a
dynamic emotion perception task. The neural networks recruited during emotion perception have previously been
shown to be altered in schizophrenia patients, which may reflect genetic susceptibility. We created schizophrenia
polygenic risk scores (PRS) using summary data from the Psychiatric Genetic Consortium of 34,241 schizophrenia
cases and 45,604 controls, for our target sample of twenty-eight healthy individuals. We explored associations
between brain activity during perception of angry, happy and neutral expressions that were either congruent or

	92

incongruent with prior expectations. Task based Partial Least Squares (PLS) was used to analyze regional brain
activity, with results identifying an association between schizophrenia PRS and activity in emotion regulation neural
correlates. Next, seed based PLS was used to assess functional connectivity of the right anterior insula (rAI) seed,
identified in the task-based PLS. Results demonstrated functional connectivity between the rAI and regions previously
implicated in implicit emotion regulation. The functional network was associated with better performance during
threat and ambiguous emotion perception in those with greater schizophrenia PRS. Our results suggest that the
common risk variants, which increase susceptibility to schizophrenia, are associated with higher activity in the implicit
emotion regulation network, possibly reflecting inefficiency. This inefficiency during emotion perception when
combined with other pathological factors may increase risk for psychosis. The findings in this study have implications
for understanding the neurophysiological biomarkers relevant for schizophrenia, and open up translational pathways
for effective psychosocial interventions.
C – 29
INVESTIGATING THE NEURAL BASIS OF SHARED PREFERENCES AND AFFILIATION
Harry Farmer – University College London; Antonia Hamilton – University College London
Similarity to the self is a key factor in our judgement of others with people showing greater feelings of affiliation
towards those they perceive as being more similar to themselves. We aimed to investigate the neural basis of this
phenomena using an fMRI. In this study participants were required to choose which of two paintings they preferred
and then observed the choices of two confederates one of whom chose the same picture as them 75% of the time
while the other only chose the same 25% of the time. Behaviourally we found that participants showed greater liking
to the similar confederate compared to the dissimilar confederate replicating the previous evidence for a similarity
liking link. BOLD activation showed that observing the different confederate’s choice led to greater activation in both
the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, which is implicated in response switching and has previously been linked to social
influence. The dissimilar confederate’s choice also led to greater activation in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex a
region heavily implicated in processing information about others. We also found that viewing one’s own chosen
stimuli after seeing the choices of both confederates led to increased activation in regions involved in self processing
and in social cognition including the temporal-parietal junction, the mid cingulate and the precuneus. Our findings
suggest that associations between shared preference and affiliation involves brain areas that are involved in learning
about other preferences and also regions involved in the processing of value similarity between self and others.
C – 30
COGNITIVE CONTROL ACTIVITY DURING FOOD CRAVING REGULATION PREDICTS THE EFFECT OF A
VALUES-BASED HEALTHY EATING INTERVENTION
Nicole R. Giuliani – University of Oregon; Lauren E. Kahn – University of Oregon; Junaid Merchant – University of
Oregon; Bryce Dirks – University of Oregon; Elliot T. Berkman – University of Oregon
Unhealthy eating can be reduced by decreasing reactivity to unhealthy foods as well as by increasing the regulation
of that desire. Seventy-four overweight (BMI 25-35) adults aged 35-45 performed a food craving regulation task
during fMRI, where they saw pictures of their most and least craved unhealthy foods with instructions to either look
or regulate. Reactivity (look craved > not craved) recruited the mesolimbic dopamine system, while regulation
(regulate > look craved) recruited the cognitive control network (e.g., right inferior frontal gyrus; rIFG). Postscanning, half of the participants performed a healthy eating intervention by writing messages to themselves that
aligned healthy eating with their core values, and half wrote about general healthy eating (control). All participants
then returned to the lab after 28 days of receiving either their messages or control messages containing standard
healthy eating information. We measured self-reported consumption of known unhealthy (e.g., processed meat,
sweets) and healthy (e.g., green vegetables) foods at both time points. Results revealed a significant interaction by
group (p=.003) such that the control group demonstrated a positive correlation between rIFG activity and
consumption, whereas the intervention group showed a negative correlation. In other words, greater engagement of
the cognitive control network during food craving regulation predicts an increase in unhealthy food consumption, a
relationship which is reversed among individuals receiving self-authored value-based messages about healthy eating.
These results are specific to the rIFG and unhealthy foods, and suggest a distinct mechanism by which core values
motivation may improve eating patterns in at-risk individuals.
C – 31
INFANTS EMOTIONAL PROCESSING: VALENCE, AROUSAL AND MOTHER-INFANT RELATIONSHIP
Joana Gonçalves – University of Porto; Susana Silva – University of Porto; Pedro Lopes-dos-Santos – University of
Porto; Marina Fuertes – University of Porto; Fernando Ferreira-Santos – University of Porto; Ana Loureiro – University
of Porto
The emotional information conveyed through facial expressions is crucial to early social interactions. However,
infant`s categorical discrimination proficiency, as well as valence and arousal modulation effects on face processing

	

93

are poorly understood. In this study, angry and happy faces were selected from the Nim Stim face stimuli set,
according to 4 conditions: High Happy (HiHA), Low Happy (LoHA), High Angry (HiHA), and Low Angry (LoAN). Thus,
categories of valence, arousal and valence + arousal were included. A total of thirty 12-month-old infants
participated in a Visual-Paired Comparison Task. In this protocol first a LoHA face was presented (habituation)
followed by 6 trials composed of two contrasting emotional faces (one new and the other was the one used in
habituation). Data was collected using an eye-tracking system. Infants’ attachment was also evaluated using the
strange situation procedure. We found a significantly higher fixation time for the new face when compared with the
habituation face, suggesting that 12-month-old infants are able to discriminate different emotional faces. Moreover,
differences of fixation time were significant for the arousal but nor for the valence contrast. We also found a
statistically significant effect of infant’s attachment classification on infant’s emotional discrimination, specifically in
the arousal contrast. Particularly, resistant-ambivalent infants showed a preference for HiHA (high arousal, happy)
compared to LoHa (low arousal, happy), while avoidant infants showed the reverse pattern (LoHA>HiHA). Our
findings support the notion that early social-emotional experiences with the mother are related to infants social
information processing.
C – 32
FEAR IN THE MIND’S EYE: MENTAL IMAGERY OF A FEAR CONDITIONED STIMULUS PRODUCES A
DETECTABLE YET ATTENUATED FEAR RESPONSE
Steven G. Greening – Louisiana State University; Tae-Ho Lee – University of North Carolina; Rachel Millin – University
of Washington; Mara Mather – University of Southern California; Jonas T. Kaplan – University of Southern California
In this study, we investigated the ability of mental imagery to evoke emotion. This can occur when we generate a
mental representation “in the mind’s eye” of an emotion-eliciting or emotion-relevant visual percept. Specifically, we
predicted that mental imagery of a previously fear-conditioned visual stimulus (CS+), compared to imagery of a
neutral stimulus (CS-), would produce a discernible yet attenuated fear response. We had 12 participants complete
our fear conditioning and mental imagery task while undergoing concurrent fMRI and psychophysiological recordings
of the skin conductance response (SCR). Behaviorally, we found a main effect of CS-type, such that viewing or
imagining the CS+ was associated greater self-reported fear than when viewing or imaging the CS- (p<.01); and an
interaction indicating that self-reported fear is greater when viewing compared to imagining the CS+ (p<.05).
Consistent with the behavioral effects, we observed a similar main effect in the SCR data, such that participants had
a greater SCR to CS+ relative to CS- stimuli irrespective of viewing versus imagining (p<.05). A preliminary univariate
analysis of the fMRI data suggests a similar pattern of results in the anterior insula during viewing versus imagining
the CS+ compared to the CS-. These effects can not be explained by differences in self-reported imagery vividness
nor imagery effort, as there were no significant differences for the CS+ compared to the CS- in either. These
preliminary results indicate that generating a mental image of a fear conditioned stimulus produces a detectable,
though attenuated, behavioral, physiological, and neural fear response.
C – 33
READING PICTURE-INDUCED POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE EMOTIONS USING FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AND
MACHINE LEARNING
Nathaniel B. Haines – The Ohio State University; Matthew W. Southward – The Ohio State University; Jennifer S.
Cheavens – The Ohio State University; Woo-Young Ahn – The Ohio State University
Recognizing facial expressions (FEs) of emotion is crucial for our well-being, social interaction, and survival. Most
emotion recognition research has focused on manual coding of FEs: human raters are trained to code FEs, and then
watch and rate numerous videos/images. Rigorous training can achieve high accuracy and reliability, but it is
inefficient and does not provide a mechanistic understanding of how ratings are generated. Here, we demonstrate
that computer vision technology and machine learning can yield automatic coding of FEs and provide insights into
how humans generate emotion ratings. Participants (N=112) viewed 42 IAPS images while their FEs were video
recorded. Three independent coders rated each recording for participants’ positive and negative emotion intensity. A
computer vision tool (FACET) was used to generate time-series of evidence for 20 FEs (a.k.a. action units). Data in
the training set (66%) were used to train machine learning models with the goal of predicting human ratings.
Predictive accuracy of each model was tested on unseen data. With the best-performing machine learning model
(Random Forest), mean correlations between predicted and actual ratings were .85 and .73 for positive and negative
emotions, respectively. While multivariate patterns of predictive FEs were similar across all coders, we found
distinctive facial patterns for predicting positive and negative emotion. In summary, our results shed light on the
mechanism of emotion recognition from facial expressions. This line of research may provide objective and
automated measures of emotion recognition and point the way to real-world applications and future research.

	94

C – 34
REGULATING RESPONSES TO NEGATIVE SOCIAL STIMULI ACROSS DEVELOPMENT
Chelsea A. Helion – Columbia University; Jennifer A. Silvers – University of California, Los Angeles; Alisa Powers –
Long Island University; Michael Dreyfuss – Weill Cornell Medical College; Katie Insel – Harvard University; Peter Franz
– Harvard University; Jochen Weber – Columbia University; Walter Mischel – Columbia University; BJ Casey – Yale
University; Kevin Ochsner – Columbia University
There are many times in life when we must successfully regulate our emotions in order to achieve our goals. One
need only look at the actors who have just lost the Oscar, the runner-up for Miss America, or second-place Olympic
medalists to see extremely successful (or terribly failed) acts of emotion regulation. In this research, we explore how
two types of affective regulation—cognitive reappraisal and impulse control—impact the influence of affective
responding on behavior across a wide developmental age group (6-25). To examine this question, we collected
behavioral and fMRI data from 72 participants who completed two tasks: 1) a task wherein regulating one’s negative
affect is the primary goal of the task (Cognitive Reappraisal), and 2) a task wherein individuals must exercise impulse
control in order to inhibit responses to negative affective stimuli (Emotional Go/No-Go). We found a relationship
between behavior across the tasks: participants who were more successful at regulating their negative emotions
using reappraisal were also better at inhibiting their responses to negative stimuli in the emotional go/no-go task
across the development age range. We also found neural overlap across both tasks, such that regulation involved
greater recruitment of prefrontal regions and dampening of activity in the right amygdala. Connectivity analyses
indicated age-related differences in the recruitment of lateral prefrontal regions when modulating amygdala activity
based on the type of regulation being implemented.
C – 35
PREPARED SAFETY STIMULI AND FEAR LEARNING: EXAMINING THE EFFECT OF SOCIAL SUPPORT ON
FEAR ACQUISITION AND FEAR EXTINCTION
Erica Hornstein – University of California, Los Angeles; Naomi Eisenberger – University of California, Los Angeles
Previous research has demonstrated that social support is one category of prepared safety stimuli. The current work
builds on these findings by examining the impact of social support on the fear learning process. First, in a study
evaluating the impact of social support on fear acquisition, participants underwent a fear acquisition procedure in
which neutral stimuli were paired with either a social support figure’s image or a stranger’s image. Results showed
that while fear was associated with stimuli paired with images of strangers, none was associated with those paired
with images of social support figures. Next, in a study evaluating the impact of social support on fear extinction,
participants were first trained to associate fear with two neutral stimuli and then underwent a fear extinction
procedure in which those stimuli were paired with either a social support figure’s image or a stranger’s image.
Results showed that when presented alone post-procedure, stimuli previously paired with an image of a stranger
continued to elicit a fear response, while those previously paired with an image of a social support figure did not,
replicating previous findings. Additionally, this same pattern of results was viewed 24 hours later during a fear
reinstatement test. These results demonstrate that social support reduces fear acquisition and enhances fear
extinction, findings that are in contrast to what would be expected for learned safety signals. These opposing effects
suggest that the safety category may be more complex than previously thought and that certain assumptions about
this category must be revisited.
C – 36
RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE AMYGDALA-VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTICAL NETWORK AND ANXIETY: MODERATING INFLUENCES OF SEX AND TIME
Jeremy F. Huckins – Dartmouth College; M. Justin Kim – Duke University; Todd F. Heatherton – Dartmouth College;
Paul J. Whalen – Dartmouth College; William M. Kelley – Dartmouth College
Neuroimaging studies of anxiety have linked decreased functional and structural connectivity between the amygdala
and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) with elevated levels of self-reported anxiety. One way to further our
understanding of the nature of this brain-anxiety relationship is to consider potential modulatory factors from
datasets with sufficient power. To this end, we sought to replicate the inverse relationship between amygdala-vmPFC
resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) and anxiety (Kim et al., 2011) in a large-scale RSFC dataset (n=375) and
test for potential moderators of this relationship. Consistent with previous RSFC studies of anxiety, an inverse
correlation between right amygdala-vmPFC functional connectivity and trait anxiety (measured with the STAI) was
observed (r=-0.15, p<0.005). The left amygdala did not show the same relationship. Moderator analysis revealed a
significant effect of sex, such that males, compared to females, demonstrated a stronger inverse correlation between
amygdala-vmPFC functional connectivity and trait anxiety (p<0.05). When taking into account the time between
survey and scan we observe a significant relationship between left amygdala-vmPFC connectivity and STAI only in
male subjects where the STAI was collected within two weeks of the RSFC scan (p<0.05). Behaviorally, test-retest
reliability of STAI decreases over time (Nixon et al., 1977) and those decreases seem to be reflected in our ability to

	

95

an inverse relationship between STAI and vmPFC-amygdala connectivity. Overall, the current data replicate the
previously identified relationship between vmPFC-amygdala connectivity and STAI but identify sex and time as key
moderators.
C – 37
CAN’T FIGHT THIS FEELING: THE IMPACT OF EMOTIONAL FACES ON ADOLESCENTS’ COGNITIVE
CONTROL
Susannah L. Ivory – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Ethan M. McCormick – University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill; Eva H. Telzer – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Adolescence is a time of social reorientation towards friends and peers. Socioemotional context impacts adolescents’
ability to engage in cognitive control, with adolescents showing impaired inhibition in response to both positive and
negative social input. The present studies used a unique social stop signal task to examine cognitive control in the
presence of social cues. In Study 1, 55 adolescents (12-14 years) and 51 adults (27-56 years) completed a
behavioral social stop signal task, during which they had to inhibit a motor response in the presence of happy, angry,
and neutral faces, which were age-matched for the two groups. Adolescents’ cognitive control was significantly
impaired in the presence of happy faces compared to neutral and angry faces, whereas no emotion effect was found
in the adult sample. In Study 2, 59 adolescents completed the social stop signal task while undergoing an fMRI
session. Behaviorally, we replicated the results of Study 1, finding that adolescents’ cognitive control was significantly
impaired in the presence of happy faces. At the neural level, adolescents demonstrated increased bilateral insula
activation to happy faces on trials where they responded incorrectly compared to trails where they responded
accurately. Furthermore, we found increased activation in the ventral striatum and medial prefrontal cortex to happy
faces on trials where they responded correctly compared to trails where they responded incorrectly. These findings
suggest that adolescents are particularly susceptible to positive social input from their environment during cognitively
demanding activities, which is subserved by activation in the corticolimbic system.
C – 38
OXYTOCIN AND VASOPRESSIN MODIFIES SOCIAL ENCOUNTERS DIFFERENTLY IN MALE AND FEMALE
MACAQUE MONKEYS
Yaoguang Jiang – University of Pennsylvania; Michael L. Platt – University of Pennsylvania
The neuropeptide oxytocin (OT) and Arginine-Vasopressin (AVP) are known to influence social functions in a wide
array of mammals. In primates, OT delivered intranasally enhances trust and promotes prosocial behavior. The
precise neural mechanisms underlying these effects, however, remain unclear. In this study we showed that treating
one male macaque monkey with intranasal OT relaxed his social interaction with another male. OT treatment
simultaneously suppressed the threatening behavior of dominant males and increased the boldness of submissive
males, effectively flattening the pre-existing social hierarchy. Additionally, OT also enhanced the effectiveness of
social communication by increasing the behavioral synchrony between the pair. Notably, OT altered the behavior of
not only the treated monkey but also his non-treated partner. These effects were largely recapitulated when OT was
injected focally into the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACCg), a brain area previously linked to empathy, self-control, and
other-regarding behavior. Additionally, the effects of OT were also reproduced, with greater efficacy, via intranasal
delivery of AVP in male macaque monkeys. Taken together, these results demonstrated that exogenous OT
modulates social behavior partially through non-specific binding with AVP receptors in ACCg. In contrast, OT and AVP
intranasal administration in female macaque monkeys resulted in significantly different behavioral patterns. Most
notably, both neuropeptides heightened the alertness of females during their interactions with males. Additionally,
OT and AVP both significantly reduced the amount of time females chose to spend together in the same home cage,
as well as the amount of time they spent grooming each other.
C – 39
EFFECTS OF ACETAMINOPHEN AND IBUPROFEN ON MENTAL ROTATION
Amanda Kaczmarek – University of California, Santa Barbara; Youngki Hong – University of California, Santa Barbara;
Alexis Keaveney – The Ohio State University; Baldwin Way – The Ohio State University; Kyle Ratner – University of
California, Santa Barbara
These results are part of an ongoing project examining the effects of acetaminophen and ibuprofen on social
perception and evaluation (Current n=201, preregistered n=300). Previous research in our lab suggests that
acetaminophen blunts evaluative biases in face representations of minimal groups. Since representing faces of group
members is influenced by both evaluative and visual sources, the goal of the current work is to examine
acetaminophen and ibuprofen effects on a visualizing task that is less influenced by evaluative information. We
conducted a double-blind study wherein participants took acetaminophen, ibuprofen, or a placebo and completed a
mental rotation task to assess visualization ability. Analyses indicate a significant difference between the
acetaminophen and placebo conditions, but no ibuprofen effects. This work suggests that acetaminophen may

	96

influence social perception by disrupting visualization ability.
C – 40
IT’S THE THOUGHT THAT COUNTS: THE NEURAL INTERACTION OF PERSON AND VALENCE IN
EVERYDAY SOCIAL AND NON-SOCIAL SCENARIOS THAT ELICIT GRATITUDE OR DISTRESS
Christina M. Karns – University of Oregon
A moral emotion such as gratitude can be understood in the context of the social expectations we have of other
people. When we receive an unexpected benefit or harm, the social agency of another person shapes the emotional
experience. How do social and value-dependent neural processes support these experiences? FMRI was used to
examine this question in a task where 32 female participants read short second-person vignettes about everyday
problems, such as parking, deadlines, and obligations, in which the final sentence revealed a positive or negative
outcome that was due to another person’s intent or not. When a person intended the outcome, regardless of
outcome valence, responses were larger throughout the ventral medial prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal
cortex, as well as the superior temporal gyrus (STG) (p < .001, k > 20, FWE p < .05) overlapping with regions
identified during a separate theory of mind (TOM) localizer task (conjunction p < .001, k > 10, FWE < .05).
Importantly, person and valence interacted such that positive person-intended outcomes elicited larger parameter
estimates in the most ventral aspect of the medial prefrontal cortex, along with the anterior middle frontal gyrus,
posterior parietal cortex and left and right STG (p < .001, k > 20, FWE p < .05) consistent with regions in which we
also observed change with gratitude training in a separate altruism task. These results demonstrate that the
ventromedial cortex and superior temporal gyrus support gratitude through an interaction between valence and
social agency.
C – 41
CONVERGENT VALENCE REPRESENTATIONS ACROSS AUDITORY AND VISUAL MODALITIES FROM FMRI
DATA
Jongwan Kim – University of South Carolina; Svetlana Shinkareva – University of South Carolina; Douglas Wedell –
University of South Carolina
In an fMRI study participants made responses to either semantic or affective content of short silent videos or music
clips on a given trial. Valence was carefully matched across visual and auditory modes and manipulated at three
levels: positive, neutral or negative, while controlling for arousal. The aim of the study was to localize brain regions
that represent affective valence consistently across visual and auditory modalities, a modality-general representation.
Whole brain analyses supported the existence of modality-general representations through cross-modal MVPA
classification of valence, and these representations were not dependent on the task. Brain regions reflecting
modality-general valence were identified by searchlight analysis by comparing the correlation of voxel responses to
the same and different valence conditions across the two modalities. Seven clusters were identified that distinguished
signed valence, unsigned valence or both. The identified clusters were validated with crossmodal MVPA and
confirmatory MDS. Signed valence was represented in the precuneus, unsigned valence in the bilateral medial
prefrontal cortex, superior temporal sulcus (STS)/postcentral, and middle frontal gyrus (MFG) and both types were
represented in the STS/MFG and thalamus. These results support the idea that modality-general valence is
represented in a network of several locations throughout the brain.
C – 42
THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF EMPATHIC ACCURACY IN ADOLESCENT GIRLS WITH TURNER SYNDROME
Megan Klabunde – Stanford University; Aaron M. Piccirilli – Stanford University; Andrew Gundran – Stanford
University; Allan Reiss – Stanford University
Introduction: Turner Syndrome (TS) is a disorder in human females in which part or all of one X chromosome is
absent. Despite having normal IQ, girls with TS demonstrate neurocognitive deficits, in particular, visual-spatial and
executive function abnormalities. Girls with TS also have well-documented social difficulties, show poor performance
on tasks related to social/emotional stimuli, and demonstrate deficits in fearful face recognition and theory of mind
tasks. Methods: We are using functional near-infrared spectroscopy to elucidate the neural mechanisms underlying
social-emotional problems in TS. A total of 15 girls with TS are being compared to 15 typically developing adolescent
girls while they undergo the Empathic Accuracy Task (EAT). A line-tracking task is also utilized to assess and control
for visual-spatial and motor abilities. Results: Behavioral findings comparing empathic accuracy between the two
groups will be presented as will group-specific patterns of brain activation during the EAT. Key brain regions of
interest include the medial prefrontal cortex, and the right parietal and temporal cortices. Conclusions: The results
from this study will help identify the role that visual-spatial and theory of mind abnormalities play in social deficits
observed in girls with TS. Our results may also provide valuable information about the role of the X-chromosome in
empathic processing and potential ways to improve empathic abilities in persons with theory of mind deficits.

	

97

C – 43
NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF POPULARITY AND CLOSENESS DIFFERS DEPENDING ON CONTEXT
Monica Kullar – Stanford University; Sylvia A. Morelli – University of Illinois at Chicago; Ryan W. Carlson – Stanford
University; Jamil Zaki – Stanford University
Humans naturally monitor others’ social status (e.g., popularity), as well as the status of their personal relationship
with different individuals (e.g., how close are we?). However, it is unknown whether people (i) automatically track
popularity rather than closeness (or vice versa) and (ii) flexibly shift their representations of others depending on the
social context. To investigate these questions, we scanned 52 participants as they viewed photos of 30 individuals in
their freshman dorm: (i) without instruction or (ii) while explicitly evaluating how close they felt to each individual.
When passively-viewing network members, people neurally tracked popularity in regions related to mentalizing and
reward. When assessing closeness, brain activity indicated that participants no longer tracked popularity and instead
tracked closeness in reward-related regions. These findings suggest that individuals tend to automatically focus on
social status, but that they can also flexibly shift how they represent others depending on the context.
C – 44
LOVE FLOWS DOWNSTREAM: A NEURAL PATTERN SIMILARITY APPROACH TO PERCEPTION OF PAIN
IN SELF AND FAMILY
Tae-Ho Lee – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Yang Qu – Stanford University; Eva H. Telzer – University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Emotional experiences often occur in an interpersonal context. For example, parents may experience more negative
feelings when their child is upset. The current study aimed to capture emotion perception in an interpersonal context
within parent-child dyadic relationships, using a neural pattern similarity approach. Mother-adolescent dyads (N=22)
each completed an emotion perception task during fMRI. During the task, adolescents and their mother each saw
negative emotional images and were instructed to either imagine the target person in the scene as themselves or
their family member (i.e., child for the mother’s scan, mother for the child’s scan). Using representational similarity
analysis, we compared neural pattern similarity for the self and mother (or child), focusing on the fusiform, a neural
region involved in emotion perception. Overall, mothers showed greater neural similarity when perceiving emotion in
the self versus child context, whereas children showed less neural pattern similarity and significantly differentiated
between self and mother. Interestingly, children’s neural pattern similarity was dependent upon parent-child
relationship quality, such that they showed greater neural pattern similarity when they reported high relationship
quality, whereas parents’ neural pattern similarity was high and independent of relationship quality. Taken together,
our findings suggest that as children move away from their parents during adolescence, they show more distinct
neural patterns in emotion perception involving the self and mother, and such distinction is sensitive to parent-child
relationship quality. In contrast, mothers’ perception for their child is selfless and unconditional.
C – 45
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL INFLUENCES ON THE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF EMOTION REGULATION
Lynda Lin – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Yang Qu – Stanford University; Eva Telzer – University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill
The experience and regulation of emotions usually occur in a social context, yet the questions of how others
influence our emotions and how these influences might impact people of different cultural backgrounds differently,
have remained largely unexplored. The goal of this study was to examine the neural mechanisms underlying social
influence on emotion regulation among members of two different cultural groups. 22 American and 23 Chinese
undergraduate students first came for a behavioral session where they were asked to view and rate how people in
different social contexts would feel. About a week later, they completed a task in the fMRI scanner where they saw
the same pictures, but were also given information on how other people rated the pictures (influence trials) or were
not given any information on how others rated them (no influence trials). After seeing this information, they were
asked to rate the pictures once more. We found that both cultural groups engaged neural regions involved in
thinking about others (DMPFC, TPJ) when seeing the influence vs no influence feedback, suggesting participants
thought about others’ opinions when regulating their emotions. In addition, American participants (but not Chinese)
recruited neural regions associated with reward (ventral striatum) when they did not see influence from others
compared to when they did. These results suggest that American participants might find it rewarding to not be
influenced by others, which might be explained by the heightened emphasis on independence in American culture.
C – 46
HOW CREATIVITY IS IMPRINTED ON THE SOCIAL BRAIN DURING SELF AND OTHERS PROCESSING:
THE MODERATION ROLE OF SELF-CONSTRUAL
Yi Liu – Shenzhen University; Claudio Petti – University of Salento; Shihui Han – Peking University
Creativity is an adaptive way of thinking and results in novel and useful solutions. Individuals with high and low

	98

creativity showed different features in the brain. Previous research mostly focused on whether creative people
showed special brain activity during cognitive tasks. However, whether creative people have some specificity in their
social brain during self/other processing is still unknown. There has been behavioral evidence showed self-construal,
a concept related to self-other relationship, could influence creative performance. The current work measured
participants' trait creativity and self-construal (e.g., interdependence) using questionnaires and integrated functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and self-reference paradigm to induce self/other-related neural activities to
investigate whether trait creativity is associated with self/other-related neural activity and the moderation role of selfconstrual. Our results showed that trait creativity is characterized by the neural activities in left superior temporal
sulcus, right anterior insular, right temporal-parietal junction and right precentral gyrus underlying self-processing
and by left superior temporal sulcus and right posterior insular activity underlying friend-processing and the link
between creativity and neural activity was moderated by self-construal. Self-construal also modulated the functional
connectivity between medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and postcentral gyri during friend-processing. Moreover,
participants with high and low creativity traits can be dissociated in a three-dimension space defined by
interdependence and these brain activities. Our findings provide neural imaging evidence that trait creativity is
imprinted on the social brain and the link between creativity and the neural activities underlying the processing of
self and others is modulated by self-construal.
C – 47
MEDIA MULTITASKING IS ASSOCIATED WITH REDUCED ACTIVITY IN FRONTOPARIETAL (VERSUS
REWARD) SYSTEMS, LOWER TRAIT SELF-CONTROL, AND HIGHER BODY MASS INDEX
Richard B. Lopez – Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton – Dartmouth College
In a recent review of the self-regulation literature, Kelley, Wagner, and Heatherton (2015, Annual Review of
Neuroscience) raised the possibility that media multitasking may alter the functioning of brain systems associated
with attention and executive control, resulting in possible self-regulatory failure in the eating domain and attendant
obesity. To test this hypothesis directly, we ran a large sample (N=146) of college-aged students in a neuroimaging
study, in which we assessed both media multitasking (MMT) tendencies and brain responses to appetitive food cues.
We computed a brain-based index reflecting the balance of food cue elicited activity in the frontoparietal network—
independently defined in resting state functional connectivity studies—relative to activity in regions associated with
reward processing (i.e., bilateral ventral striatum and orbitofrontal cortex). Higher balance scores reflected relatively
greater recruitment of the frontoparietal network (versus reward regions), whereas lower scores reflected less
frontoparietal recruitment and more reward related activity. We found that increased MMT tendencies were
associated with lower balance scores, r = -0.309, p < .001. As a key validation step, we tested for other relationships
in an independent, held-out sample (N=94). Specifically, MMT was negatively associated with trait self-control, r = 0.463, p < .001, and positively tracked with body mass index, r = 0.283, p = .007. These findings, although
preliminary, suggest that media multitasking may characterize individuals who are hyper-responsive to rewarding
cues in the environment, which may then lead to patterns of overeating and weight gain.
C – 48
THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF COMPETENCE TRAITS: AN FMRI STUDY
Ning Ma – South China Normal University; Simin Wang – South China Normal University; Tingyong Feng – Southwest
University; Frank Van Overwalle – Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Previous neuroimaging studies have revealed that a trait code is mainly represented in the ventral medial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC). However, those studies only investigated the neural code of warmth traits. According to the ‘Big
Two’ model of impression formation, competence traits are the other major dimension when we judge others. The
current study explored the neural representation of competence traits by using an fMRI repetition suppression
paradigm, which is a rapid reduction of neuronal responses upon repeated presentation of the same implied trait.
Participants had to infer an agent’s trait from brief behavioral descriptions that implied a competence trait. In each
trial, the critical target sentence was preceded by a prime sentence that implied the same or opposite competencerelated trait, or no trait. The results revealed robust repetition suppression from prime to target in the vmPFC and
precuneus during trait conditions. Critically, the suppression effect was much stronger after being primed with a
similar and opposite competence trait compared with a trait-irrelevant prime. This suppression pattern was found
nowhere else in the brain. Consistent with previous fMRI studies, we suggest that the neural code of competence
traits is represented in these two brain areas with different levels of abstraction.
C – 49
TRAIT ANXIETY INFLUENCES HOW INDIVIDUALS EXPRESS SURPRISE
Alison M. Mattek – Dartmouth College; Julia L. Berkowitz – Dartmouth College; Samantha N. Chavez – Dartmouth
College; Tracy C. d'Arbeloff – Dartmouth College; Michael D. Mayer – Dartmouth College; Paul J. Whalen –
Dartmouth College

	

99

Individuals with high trait anxiety experience states of increased vigilance more frequently. Here we examined
whether these individuals were more proficient at displaying facial signals that express vigilance. To this end, we (1)
measured self-reported anxiety (and other trait measures for specificity) and (2) photographed displays of six basic
emotional facial expressions in a group of participants (N=45). The accuracy of each posed facial expression was
determined by independent raters who sorted the photos into emotion categories. We selected trait measurements
that were predictive of accuracy (of particular emotion expressions) using a training set (n=24), and verified these
predictors on a testing set (n=21). Results showed that trait anxiety predicted the accurate portrayal of surprise,
such that individuals with low trait anxiety are less likely to pose a surprised facial expression that is accurately
categorized by independent raters (predicted accuracy versus actual accuracy of surprised faces in the testing set:
r(19) = 0.477, p = 0.029). Anxiety did not predict rating accuracy of any other facial expression category. Perhaps,
high-anxious individuals have more practice widening their eyes (a gesture that facilitates information gathering) and
as a result pose surprised facial expressions that others are better able to recognize. More generally, this facial
expression stimulus set allows for the study of the trait characteristics of the individuals perceiving an emotional
signal as they interact with the individuals sending that signal, whose trait characteristics are known.
C – 50
TRAIT MINDFULNESS IS RELATED TO RETROSPECTIVE BUT NOT CURRENT PAIN
Dominik Mischkowski – National Institutes of Health; Caitlin Stavish – Boston University; Esther Palacios-Barrios –
National Institutes of Health; Lauren Banker – National Institutes of Health; Troy C. Dildine – National Institutes of
Health & Karolinska Institutet; Lauren Y. Atlas – National Institutes of Health
Trait mindfulness is the disposition to experience enhanced internal and external attentional focus in the present
moment. Individuals who report greater dispositional mindfulness also report enhanced coping during acute pain
(e.g., Grant & Rainville, 2009). However, it remains unclear whether dispositional mindfulness alleviates the actual
pain experience, or alters retrospective ratings of one’s experience through cognitive processes such as reappraisal.
Seventy-two healthy adult volunteers completed a measure of trait mindfulness, the Mindful Awareness Attention
Scale (MAAS; Brown & Ryan, 2003), and rated pain while receiving noxious heat stimulation on the volar forearm in
two different tasks that allowed us to calculate participants’ pain threshold and tolerance levels. We also assessed the
autonomic response to noxious heat by measuring skin conductance responses. Upon completion of the two pain
tasks, participants retrospectively rated their overall pain experience during the study on the sensory and affective
subscales of the McGill Pain Questionnaire (Melzack, 1983). Individuals who reported higher dispositional mindfulness
reported reduced sensory (r(70)=-.23, p=.056), affective (r(70)=-.25, p=.038), and combined (r(70)=-.25, p=.034)
retrospective pain ratings. However, analyses of immediate responses to noxious stimulation, including pain
threshold, tolerance, trial-by-trial ratings, or autonomic response, revealed no relationship with dispositional
mindfulness whatsoever (ps>.14). These results indicate that dispositional mindfulness does not change the
subjective or autonomic responsiveness to painful stimulation, but alters retrospective assessments of pain. Potential
mechanisms that will be investigated in future studies include altered memory, reappraisal, affective shifts, and
retrospective report biases.
C – 51
NEURAL IMPLICIT MECHANISMS OF DECEPTION DETECTION
Linda Nguyen – The University of Texas at Dallas; Leanne Young – The University of Texas at Dallas; Jelena Rakic –
The University of Texas at Dallas; Daniel Krawczyk – The University of Texas at Dallas
Humans are not very good at detecting deception. Previous research has found that humans were only correct at
detecting deception 54% of the time which is only slightly better than chance. Recently, however, there has been
some research suggesting that in fact, humans are more accurate than 54% but at an implicit level using the implicit
association test. Our study attempts to replicate these findings and tries to take these findings a step further by
adding neuroimaging analyses which have not been present in previous studies. In this study, we used a modified
implicit association test to see whether or not people were more accurate at detecting deception on an implicit level,
and we used another version of the IAT as a measure of cultural bias. We found that whenever a participant saw
someone of the same race being honest, they showed higher D scores suggesting that correct differentiation of the
liar and truth teller but not when the truth teller was of a different race. One possible interpretation of our behavioral
data was that the race effect superseded our truth/lie effect in our IAT. In our GLM analysis of the data from the
scanner IAT, we found clear evidence of a race effect and some evidence of deception detection. However, the
percent signal change had high variability. This research shows the potential for determining the mechanisms by
which we see deception and a glimpse at whether or not race and other environmental factors influence these
mechanisms.

	100

C – 52
EFFECTS OF PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS ON AFFILIATIVE FACIAL MIMICRY
Jonas P. Nitschke – McGill University; Cecile Sunahara – McGill University; Evan W. Carr – Columbia Business School;
Piotr Winkielman – University of California, San Diego; Jens C. Pruessner – McGill Centre for Studies in Aging;
Jennifer A. Bartz – McGill University
Stress is a fundamental aspect of existence that has profound consequences for individual health and wellbeing.
Recently, researchers have become interested in the effects of stress on interpersonal processes and, in particular,
empathy and affiliation although, to date, findings have been inconsistent, with work showing both enhancing and
detrimental outcomes for affiliation. These inconsistencies may be due to gender/sex difference in the stress
response. Extending our prior work showing gender differences in the effects of stress on empathy, here we
examined the effects of stress on affiliative facial mimicry (smiling to smiles), a process shown to increase
interpersonal rapport, foster empathy, and enhance affiliation. Male (n=20) and female (n=17) participants
completed a baseline mimicry task in which they were presented with smiling or frowning faces, while facial
electromyography measure changes in the zygomaticus muscle. Three weeks later, they underwent the Trier Social
Stress Test, followed by a post-stress facial mimicry task. As predicted, stress differentially impacted men and
women, with men showing a more robust cortisol response to the TSST. Regarding affiliative mimicry, consistent with
our prior work, we found a significant stress by gender interaction, such that men showed an increase in congruent
smiling following the stress task, whereas women showed no change. Of note, women were significantly more likely
to show congruent smiling at baseline. These results add to our understanding of the impact of stress and
sex/gender differences on affiliative behaviours, particularly on facial mimicry.
C – 53
ENHANCED NEURAL SIMILARITY OF FEAR PERCEPTION AND FEAR EXPERIENCE IN EXTRAORDINARY
ALTRUISTS
Katherine O'Connell – Georgetown University; Kristin M. Brethel-Haurwitz – Georgetown University; Elise M. Cardinale
– Georgetown University; Kruti M. Vekaria – Georgetown University; Emily Robertson – Georgetown University; Lydia
Meena – Georgetown University; John W. VanMeter – Georgetown University; Abigail A. Marsh – Georgetown
University
Sensitivity to others’ fear is a reliable predictor of altruistic behavior. Non-directed living kidney donors, a rare
population of extraordinary real-world altruists, show heightened amygdala activation in response to fearful facial
expressions and are relatively better at recognizing these expressions. To test the hypothesis that altruists’ neural
responses to viewing fearful faces reflects empathic simulation of the expresser’s state, we conducted a multivariate
pattern analysis of two fMRI paradigms: an emotional face viewing task and an empathic pain anticipation task. After
excluding subjects with excessive motion, the final sample consisted of 20 (9m, 11f) altruistic kidney donors and 24
(12m, 12f) matched controls. MVPA investigated brain activity patterns within a bilateral a priori fear network
(amygdala, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and hypothalamus) during responses to fearful
faces, neutral faces, pain anticipation (self-fear), and anticipation of a study partners’ pain (other-fear). Within the
fear network, a linear support vector machine using cross validation accurately distinguished brain activity patterns
during self-fear and other-fear in both groups (classification accuracy: Controls M=84%, SD=7%; Altruists M=87%,
SD=10%; ns). Representational similarity analysis showed that, relative to controls, altruists’ neural responses to
fearful facial expressions were more similar to their self-fear responses. Observed patterns also correlated with a selfreport empathy measure in altruists. This study presents the first evidence that extraordinary altruism may be
associated with self-other neural mapping of fear.
C – 54
NEURAL ACTIVITY DURING ANTI-SMOKING MESSAGE EXPOSURE PREDICTS SUBSEQUENT MESSAGE
ELABORATION
Rui Pei – University of Pennsylvania; Ralf Schmaelzle – Michigan State University; Elissa Kranzler – University of
Pennsylvania; Matt O’Donnell – University of Pennsylvania; Emily B. Falk – University of Pennsylvania
Recent neuroimaging studies have consistently shown that neural activity in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)
during heath message exposure can predict behavior change. Although self-relevance and value are functions
ascribed to mPFC, the underlying mechanisms linking mPFC activity to persuasion are not yet understood. Here we
investigated if mPFC neural activity during message exposure is also associated with subsequent message
elaboration and message-related belief change. Forty-three adolescent non-smokers participated in a functional
magnetic resonance imaging study, in which they viewed and talked about anti-smoking public service
announcements. Levels of elaboration were measured through transcripts of participants’ subsequent descriptions of
the messages using the LIWC dictionary. Smoking-relevant beliefs were measured through questionnaires before and
after the main experiment. We found that neural activity in mPFC during message exposure is associated with
subsequent message elaboration as well as changes in beliefs targeting social consequences of smoking.

	

101

C – 55
THE TIME COURSE OF IMPLICIT MORAL JUDGMENT IN GOSSIP PROCESSING MODULATED BY
DIFFERENT AGENTS
Xiaozhe Peng – Shenzhen University; Can Jiao – Shenzhen University; Chen Qingfei – Shenzhen University; Li Peng –
Shenzhen University; Li Hong – Shenzhen University
Previous studies have investigated moral violations with personal or impersonal references (i.e., the protagonists in
moral scenarios are the participants themselves or unknown other individuals); however, the roles of various agents
in moral judgments have remained unclear. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were used to investigate moral
judgments when participants viewed gossip that described (im)moral behaviors committed by different agents (self,
friend or celebrity). The results expanded our current understanding of moral judgments in a gossip evaluation task
and demonstrated that the automatic processing for moral valence in the early stage was involved as a function of
the distinctiveness of the agents. A cognitive control process was subsequently recruited to preserve positive selfviews in response to gossip that violated the self-enhancement bias. Specifically, both the early P2 components and
the late positive potential (LPC) were larger for immoral than for moral behaviors. More importantly, the P2
amplitude in the celebrity condition was more sensitive to distinguishing immoral behaviors from moral behaviors
than that in the other two conditions, whereas the moral valence effect on the LPC was predominately driven by the
self-condition. These findings demonstrated that the P2 and LPC may correspond to two successive processes of
implicit moral judgment during gossip processing.
C – 56
REGULATING EMOTION THROUGH DISTANCING: A NEUROCOGNITIVE FRAMEWORK AND METAANALYSIS
John P. Powers – Duke University; Kevin S. LaBar – Duke University
Distancing is a form of reappraisal that uses perspective taking to alter the psychological distance and emotional
impact of a stimulus. Although distancing is effective and may have advantages over other forms of reappraisal,
previous meta-analyses of functional neuroimaging have only focused on reappraisal more broadly. Here we present
a meta-analysis in support of a preliminary neurocognitive model of distancing. We hypothesized that distancing
involves generating perspectives of different psychological distances, emotional self-reflection, and cognitive
flexibility, and that these processes recruit the temporoparietal junction (TPJ) and greater default mode network as
well as dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). We identified appropriate reports by searching the PubMed and
PsycINFO databases for “distancing,” “reappraisal,” or “detachment” in combination with “functional magnetic
resonance imaging” or its abbreviated forms; examining reviews and meta-analyses related to reappraisal; and
reverse search. Twenty-three reports met inclusion criteria, which included reporting results for a contrast of
distancing to downregulate negative emotional responses relative to a natural response condition and reporting
whole-brain results from healthy participants. Activation likelihood estimation confirmed the hypothesized
involvement of the bilateral TPJ, posterior cingulate cortex, and right DLPFC, and additionally identified the left
superior temporal sulcus and supplementary motor area. These results further clarify the neural substrates of
distancing and support our preliminary neurocognitive framework. Additionally, they provide a foundation for future
translational work to potentially enhance emotion regulation skills through neurostimulation or other brain-targeted
techniques.
C – 57
DISCRIMINATING FORMAL REPRESENTATIONS OF RISK IN ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX AND
INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS
John Purcell – Indiana University, Bloomington; Rena Fukunaga – Indiana University, Bloomington; Joshua W. Brown
– Indiana University, Bloomington
Considerable debate persists around the definition of risk and how risk is evaluated across domains (e.g. monetary
risk, social risk) to impact decision-making. Depending on the area of study, the concept of risk may be defined as
the variance of the possible outcomes, the probability of a loss, or a combination of the loss probability and its
maximum possible loss. Mounting evidence suggests the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), including the surrounding
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) are key neural regions that represent perceived
risks associated with decision options. Yet it remains unclear which of these formalisms, if any, best accounts for the
pattern of activation in brain regions representing domain-specific risk. To discriminate among the possible
definitions, we used fMRI with a novel gambling task that orthogonalized the variance, loss probability, and
maximum possible loss among the risky options, while maintaining a constant expected value across all monetary
gambles. Here we show that ACC and IFG activation reflect variance, but neither loss probability nor maximum
possible loss. Across subjects, variance-related activation within the ACC correlated only indirectly with risk aversion.
Specifically, variance activation was negatively correlated with self-report measures of the expected benefits of
gambling and investment risk. Our results highlight the variance of the prospective outcomes as a formal

	102

representation of risk that is reflected both in brain activity and behavior, thus suggestive of a stronger link between
formal economic theories of financial risk and neural representations of risk impacting decision-making.
C – 58
ROMANTIC TOUCH INDUCES INTERPERSONAL SYNCHRONY AND REDUCES EXPERIENCED PAIN
Marianne Reddan – University of Colorado Boulder; Hannah Young – University of Colorado Boulder; Tor Wager –
University of Colorado Boulder
Social support and interpersonal touch profoundly influence physical health, mental well-being, and personal
relationships. A gentle caress can strengthen romantic and familial bonds and even reduce surgical recovery time in
adults. However, it is unknown if its benefits are primarily driven by biases in self-report or measurable physiological
changes. In this experiment we test how three kinds of social support between romantic couples (partner presence,
gentle stroking, and handholding) affect experiences of pain, relative to pain experienced alone. We find that touchbased social support leads only female participants to report greater reductions in pain. However, during social
support, both female and males demonstrate a reduction in pain-related physiological responses, as indicated by skin
conductance responses. This effect is strongest during handholding. Finally, we find that interpersonal synchronicity
of physiological signals may provide a mechanistic explanation for the benefits of social support: Increases in
interpersonal synchrony during handholding predict reductions in self-reported pain. Overall these results suggest
that males and females both benefit from interpersonal touch, despite differences in self-report, and that
interpersonal physiological synchrony may drive this effect.
C – 59
INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE DEFAULT MODE NETWORK PREDICTS THE
PURPOSEFULNESS OF YOUTHS’ INTENDED ADULT LIVES
Rodrigo A. Riveros Miranda – University of Southern California; Xiao-Fei Yang – University of Southern California;
Rebecca Gotlieb – University of Southern California; Erik Jahner – University of Southern California; Mary H.
Immordino-Yang – University of Southern California
Adolescents imagine their future adult life setting goals with varied levels of abstraction: low-level goals pertain to
acquiring skills, goods and positions; high-level goals pertain to core values and social responsibilities.
The brain’s Default Mode Network (DMN) is involved in projecting the self in time, as well as in reflecting on highlevel goals and values. Nevertheless, little is known about how intrinsic functional connectivity of DMN relates to the
level of abstraction of future goals in young people. Thirty-five adolescents (21 females, mean age=17.5/SD=0.84)
were interviewed about their future goals. Their reported goals were coded for level of abstraction, and highly
abstract goals were tallied. Intellectual quotient (IQ) data and 7-minute resting state fMRI scans were also collected.
The DMN was identified at the group-level using Independent Component Analysis and back-reconstructed for each
participant. Individuals’ network maps were entered into a group-level regression analysis with the count of highlevel goals as a regressor. Results were examined within the DMN. Adolescents’ high-level goals were positively
predicted by the functional connectivity of the frontal pole (p=0.001 [correcting for multiple comparisons], cluster
size 60 voxels). Results held after controlling for IQ. This study presents preliminary and novel findings on the neural
correlates of imagining a meaningful adult life during adolescence. With further research, it also opens the possibility
that educators/counselors might be able to support the positive development of purpose, a central driving force for
personal growth, moral identity and social participation, by guiding young people in the constructive reflection of
adult life.
C – 60
DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL PROCESSING OF PREDATOR AND PREY BEHAVIOR
Michael Rojek-Giffin – Leiden University; H. Steven Scholte – University of Amsterdam; Frans van Winden –
University of Amsterdam; K. Richard Ridderinkhof – University of Amsterdam; Carsten K.W. De Dreu – Leiden
University
When competing, humans either invest in protecting their resources against greedy others, or to increase their
resources at the expense of others. While competitive interactions are well documented at the behavioral level, the
neural underpinnings remain elusive. In the current study, we combined fMRI with a novel asymmetrical dyadic game
called the predator-prey game (PPG) which models domineering, exploitative behavior in one player (the predator)
and subservient, protective behavior in the other player (the prey). We employed both univariate and multivariate
analysis techniques in order to elucidate the differential neural events associated with predator and prey decisionmaking and the processing of decision outcomes. Univariate analyses revealed that during decision-making predator
behavior was preferentially reliant on the ventral striatum, a region most commonly associated with reward, while
prey behavior was preferentially reliant on the anterior insula, an integrative region associated with the processing of
risk and reward. Multivariate searchlight analyses revealed a wide range of brain regions that differed substantially
between predator and prey during both decision-making and the processing of decision outcomes. Furthermore, the

	

103

degree of this difference in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the angular gyrus, and the supramarginal gyrus
exhibited a strong negative relationship to prey competitiveness, and the degree of this difference in the right
angular gyrus likewise exhibited a positive relationship to predator competitiveness. These findings suggest that
neural processes occurring in a prefrontal-temporo-parietal network are differentially recruited during predator and
prey decision-making.
C – 61
RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN YOUNG INDIVIDUALS WITH MAJOR DEPRESSIVE
DISORDER
Ewelina Rzepa – University of Reading; Ciara McCabe – University of Reading
Our previous study showed that individuals at risk for depression by the virtue of increased depression
symptomatology presented with decreased resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) between brain regions
involved with the visual, salience, self-referential and cognitive control networks (Rzepa et al., 2016). This study
investigated whether similar changes in the RSFC networks would be observed in young individuals with Major
Depressive Disorder (MDD). We recruited 27 participants with MDD, and 31 age (16-21) and gender matched healthy
controls (HC). We examined seed based RSFC with regions of interest in the amygdala, pregenual anterior cingulate
cortex (pgACC), ventral striatum and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC). Compared to HC, the MDD individuals
had decreased RSFC between the left amygdala and the left dmPFC and the pregenual cingulate cortex seeds and
the lateral occipital cortex, and between the left ventral striatum seed and the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC).
Compared to HC, the MDD individuals had increased RSFC between the right dmPFC seed and the PCC/Precuneus.
This finding is different from our previous result of decreased RSFC between the right dmPFC seed and the
Precuneus in adolescents at increased risk for depression (Rzepa et al., 2016). This study showed that individuals
with MDD have abnormalities in the RSFC networks similar to adolescents at increased risk for depression with
exception for increased RSFC between the dmPFC seed and the Precuenus. This result is in line with previous RSFC
studies in depression and can be suggested as a possible state marker of depression (Sheline et al., 2010).
C – 62
DO MONKEYS KNOW ABOUT OTHERS' PREFERENCES?
KM Sharika – University of Pennsylvania; Michael L. Platt – University of Pennsylvania
Previous studies on prosociality in rhesus macaques have shown that monkeys often choose to make positive
decisions for a conspecific at no additional cost to self (Chang et al., 2011, Ballesta et al., 2015). However, how
monkeys learn whether a particular outcome is preferable to others or not is not well understood. We examined this
by making monkeys perform a 'willingness to pay' task in which they choose between different target options
associated with varying magnitudes of sweet or bitter tasting juice to ‘self' and ‘other' in different trials. We tested
whether monkeys were able to make appropriate choices by observing the responses of their conspecifics during the
task and if the sensitivity and specificity of choices differed when they were made for self vs. other. Our preliminary
results suggest that monkeys can in fact choose for others as they would for themselves suggesting that this
paradigm can be suitably used to explore the neural mechanisms of perspective-taking in monkeys.
C – 63
A MODEL FOR INTEGRATING SOCIAL NEUROSCIENCE, MORAL PSYCHOLOGY, AND PHILOSOPHY
Joshua A. Skorburg – University of Oregon; Mark Alfano – Delft University of Technology; Christina Karns – University
of Oregon
Much of the neuroscientific research on morality has focused on moral judgments, and more specifically, whether
those judgments reflect utilitarian or deontological intuitions. Comparatively little work has addressed the other major
school of thought from the history of moral psychology: virtue theory. To address this gap in the literature, the
present project brings together an interdisciplinary team from cognitive neuroscience and philosophy to study the
embodied and neural bases of the virtue of generosity. We have been developing philosophically informed measures
of generosity and are using electrophysiological recordings of cardiovascular (ECG, ICG) and neural (EEG) activity as
embodied markers of stress and reward processing in a charitable giving task. The present research demonstrates
how theories from moral psychology and philosophy can drive hypothesis construction in social neuroscience. For
example, Aristotle thought that the virtuous person behaves fluently and automatically, without having to exercise
regulatory control. With respect to the virtue of generosity, this theory would predict that when individuals high in
generosity are required to take money from a charity, sympathetic nervous arousal and neural markers of regulatory
control (e.g., feedback-related negativity) would be elicited. Similarly, when giving money to charity, high generosity
individuals would exhibit neural and autonomic markers consistent with reward processing. Our project thus offers a
model for integrating social neuroscience (e.g., research on self-regulation), moral psychology (e.g., research on the
development of moral character), and philosophy (e.g., normative virtue ethics).

	104

C – 64
REGULATION OF CRAVING IN ALCOHOL USE DISORDER: AN FMRI STUDY
Shosuke Suzuki – Yale University; Maggie Mae Mell – Yale University; Stephanie O'Malley – Yale University; John
Krystal – Yale University; Alan Anticevic – Yale University; Hedy Kober – Yale University
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a chronic-relapsing condition, characterized by craving for alcohol and a loss of control
over its consumption. Cognitive strategies are known to reduce self-reported craving for drugs (e.g., cigarettes,
stimulants) and food. We have previously shown that this reduction in craving depends on activation in cognitive
control-related brain regions (e.g., dorsolateral/ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; dlPFC, vlPFC) and relative deactivation
in reward-related regions (e.g., ventral striatum). We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine
behavioral and neural responses associated with alcohol craving and its regulation. Participants with AUD (N=18)
were presented with images of alcohol and high-calorie foods previously shown to induce craving. They were
instructed to think about each image in one of two ways: (1) Focus on the immediate effects of drinking or eating
(e.g., it will feel good; NOW instruction) or (2) Focus on the negative long-term effects of regular consumption (e.g.,
health problems; LATER instruction). Participants reported significantly lower craving for both alcohol and food when
using cognitive strategies (LATER > NOW), and this was accompanied by reduction in ventral-striatal activity. In
addition, despite prior reports of diminished PFC function in AUDs, participants recruited dlPFC and vlPFC during
regulation of craving for both alcohol and food. Reductions in self-reported alcohol craving correlated with increased
vlPFC activation. This suggests that individuals with AUD are capable of using cognitive strategies to reduce alcohol
craving via prefrontal mechanisms implicated in cognitive control. These findings have important implications for the
treatment of substance use disorders, including AUD.
C – 65
BIPOLAR MOOD TRAITS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH FACILITATED EMOTIONAL LEARNING
Alex R. Terpstra – University of British Columbia; Rebecca M. Todd – University of British Columbia; Sarah R. Moore –
University of British Columbia
The rate at which individuals with bipolar traits develop emotional associations may have implications for the onset
and progression of bipolar mood changes. Yet few previous studies have examined how bipolar traits relate to
patterns of emotional learning. In a healthy undergraduate sample (N=74), we examined the association of bipolar
traits with indices of emotional learning derived from three variants of an associative learning task. In each task,
participants rated the pleasantness of neutral faces that were paired (CS+) or not paired (CS-) with one of three
emotional stimuli: (1) soft touch (social reward), (2) anticipation of reward (incentive reward), and (3) uncertainty of
an aversive noise (uncertainty/stress). Bipolar traits were measured using the General Behavior Inventory, a wellvalidated measure of bipolar mood symptoms. We hypothesized that participants who exceeded cut-off scores for a
potential bipolar affective condition on this scale (BD+; n=25) would exhibit significantly increased emotional
learning relative to participants who did not exceed cut-off scores (BD-; n=49). We report that BD+ participants
demonstrated significantly greater emotional learning responses to incentive reward and uncertainty, such that BD+
participants demonstrated greater divergence between CS+ and CS- ratings across trials relative to BD- participants.
There were also marginal associations between BD status and emotional learning responses to social reward. Our
results suggest that bipolar traits may facilitate emotional learning, particularly for anticipatory rewarding and
uncertain aversive stimuli. Further research is needed to explore how emotional learning may relate to the onset and
progression of mood changes in bipolar disorder.
C – 66
BRAIN NETWORKS THAT PROCESS TASK-RELATED STRESS ARE SPATIALLY DISTRIBUTED AND
DYNAMICALLY ORGANIZED
Michael J. Tobia – Wake Forest University; Koby Hayashi – Wake Forest University; Grey Ballard – Wake Forest
University; Christian E. Waugh – Wake Forest University
The neural processing of stress during task engagement can be difficult to study because it recruits a distributed
brain network with unknown temporal dynamics. Dynamic functional connectivity (dFC) analyses may be especially
informative because they can reveal the transient formation and dissolution of brain networks. This experiment used
fMRI to investigate brain network dynamics for stress processing during a social evaluative stress task (SET). Timedependent functional coupling matrices were computed for 200 brain regions using the dynamic frequency locking
coefficient for 16 healthy adult female participants, and group data were decomposed with the
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC model to identify network structure and dynamics. The matrix decomposition revealed several
components whose coupling strength varied during the rest and stress epochs. One component identified a bilateral
ventral PFC (vPFC) community with a highly connected node in the left subgenual cingulate cortex (MNI [x y z] = [0
20 -8]) that was strongly activated late in the SET and demonstrated brief resurgence during a subsequent recovery
epoch. In addition, self-reported anticipatory negative affect was correlated with subject weights on a fronto-parietalcerebellar network with strong coupling to the right lateral PFC (beta = .038, p = .018). These results suggest that

	

105

brain networks for processing task-induced mental stress are not static and that dynamic functional connectivity
analyses can identify how various stress-related networks may strengthen and weaken over time.
C – 67
MULTI-SYSTEM APPROACHES: UNDERSTANDING STRESS AND WORKING MEMORY IN CHILDREN
Nancy Tsai – University of California, Irvine; Jodi Quas – University of California, Irvine
Working memory (WM) is a strong predictor of academic outcomes. Individuals differ in their WM abilities, and such
variation could be due to conditions that tax the WM system, such as arousal. Research examining the influence of
arousal, typically as indexed via stress-sensitive physiological markers (e.g., cortisol), has yielded conflicting results.
In adults, negative associations between arousal and WM have emerged. What remains unclear, however, concerns
how arousal affects WM in children, a noteworthy omission given that WM exerts a profound influence on learning
outcomes in childhood. Quesada et al. (2012) failed to uncover significant associations between cortisol responses to
a laboratory task and WM in 8-10 year olds. It is unclear whether arousal indexed via multiple stress response
systems (e.g. the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal gland [HPA] axis and sympathetic nervous system [SNS]) would
reveal interaction effects and whether these effects would vary across a wider age range. We exposed 101 8-14 year
olds to the Trier Social Stress Test-Modified (TSST-M; Yim et al., 2010) and indexed arousal via multiple stress
response systems with repeated saliva samples collected for cortisol and alpha amalyse (sAA) to index HPA and SNS
activity. Approximately 20 minutes after the TSST-M ended, children completed an n-back task (Jaeggi et al., 2010),
a well-established measure of WM. Our findings reveal age-dependent differences for WM performance: as age
increases, high SAA, regardless of cortisol level, is associated with improved WM performance. Subsequent analyses
will examine other variables such as gender and puberty for potential moderating effects.
C – 68
MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS OF ALTRUISM AND SELFISHNESS IN SOCIAL DECISION-MAKING
Lukas J. Volz – University of California, Santa Barbara; Locke Welborn – University of California, Santa Barbara;
Matthias S. Gobel – University of California, Santa Barbara; Scott T. Grafton – University of California, Santa Barbara;
Michael S. Gazzaniga – University of California, Santa Barbara
Social decision-making involves frequent, unavoidable trade-offs between benefits and costs for self and others. The
ability to make such interpersonal decisions is essential for successfully navigating the social landscapes of daily life.
Recent studies suggest hyper-altruistic tendencies to constrain such decisions whereas implications for real-life
scenarios remain controversial. In the present study, we assessed dynamic sensitivity to rewards and costs in
interpersonal contexts, adapting a decision-making paradigm used both in human and animal populations. In two
intrapersonal decision conditions, participants chose to accept or reject trade-offs that allocate monetary reward and
electric shocks either exclusively to themselves or exclusively to another person. In two interpersonal decision
conditions, participants chose to accept or reject trade-offs in which rewards and costs are asymmetric (rewards to
self – shocks to other; shocks to self – reward to other). Using computational modeling and representational
similarity analysis (RSA), we quantified decision profiles across these conditions. RSA revealed differential patterns of
reward-cost trade-offs for oneself versus another person when assessing both decisions and associated response
times. Relative to intrapersonal trade-offs, participants were more hesitant both to impose costs for their own benefit
and to suffer costs on another’s behalf. These findings were corroborated by computational models highlighting
differences in the sensitivity to reward and costs across experimental conditions, extending previous findings. In
summary, we present evidence of both selfish and altruistic tendencies in social decision-making. We will discuss the
critical importance of interpersonal contexts for shaping the psychological and neural mechanisms underlying such
decisions.
C – 69
REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY ANALYSES REVEAL STABLE MENTAL STATE CONCEPTS FOR SELF
AND OTHERS
Miriam E. Weaverdyck – Princeton University; Mark A. Thornton – Harvard University; Diana I. Tamir – Princeton
University
How do we understand others’ invisible mental states – their happiness, nostalgia, or decision-making? One
possibility is that we use the same mental state representations to conceptualize others’ experiences as we use to
represent our own experiences. Here, we test this possibility using fMRI and multivoxel pattern analysis. Participants
in the imaging experiment imagined three target people at differing psychological distances from the self – the self, a
close similar other, and a dissimilar stranger – experiencing 25 mental states. On each trial, participants indicated
which of two scenarios would be more likely to elicit a particular mental state in one of the targets. We found that
each target elicited different levels of univariate activity and unique target-specific multivoxel patterns within the
social brain network. However, individual mental states were represented with highly consistent patterns of neural
activity across the three targets. That is, people thought about each mental state in a similar way, regardless of who

	106

experienced it. Using representational similarity analysis to map the conceptual space of mental states, we found
robust stability across targets with no significant changes in the “shape” of the representational space. The same set
of dimensions, with the same weights on each, could describe the state-specific activity patterns within each target.
Together, these results suggest that mentalizing relies on the independent contributions of thinking about a mental
state and thinking about a specific person.
C – 70
EMBODIED SIMULATION IN FALSE BELIEF UNDERSTANDING REFLECTED IN THE ROTATION RELATED
NEGATIVITY
Jiushu Xie – South China Normal University; Him Cheung – The Chinese University of Hong Kong; Yanli Huang – The
University of Hong Kong; Lei Mo – South China Normal University
This study examines the spontaneous use of embodied egocentric transformation (EET) in understanding false beliefs
in the minds of others. EET involves the participants mentally transforming themselves into the orientation of an
agent when trying to adopt his or her visuospatial perspective. Since false belief is propositional and not apparently
linked to face orientation and point of view, we do not know if it also involves EET as visuospatial perspective does.
In this experiment, an agent placed a ball into one of two boxes and left. The ball then rolled out and moved either
into the other box (new box) or back into the original one (old box). The participants were to decide if the agent
would try to recover the ball in one specific box while the event-related potential (ERP) technique was used to
measure their brain responses. We manipulated the angle between agent and participants when the participants
completed the false belief task. Results showed a rotation-related negativity (RRN) at the parietal electrode sites
between 300 and 700 ms. The potential’s mean amplitude was a function of the rotation angle: the potential became
more negative while the angle between agent and participants increased (i.e., more mental rotation had to be
executed). The results support that people might mentally transform themselves to the others’ positions to
understand what others think. The current study suggests that higher socio-cognitive processes that are propositional
in nature (e.g., false belief reasoning), are also embodied, as stipulated by the embodied simulation theory.
C – 71
CHANGE-POINT ANALYSES OF POSITIVE EMOTIONS SUPPORTING STRESS RECOVERY
Xi Yang – Wake Forest University; Katelyn Garcia – Wake Forest University; Kateri McRae – University of Denver;
Christian Waugh – Wake Forest University
Despite the accruing evidence showing that positive emotions facilitate stress recovery, the neural basis for this
effect remains unclear. To test the potential mechanism that positive emotions decrease negative emotions via an
adaptive change in stress-related ruminations, we compared stress recovery for people reflecting on the stressor
while in a positive emotional context with that for people in a neutral context. In the MRI scanner, healthy
community participants (n = 50) completed a stressful anagram task followed with a recovery period when they
reflected on the task failure while watching a positive or neutral emotion inducing video. Throughout the tasks,
participants also reported their pleasant and unpleasant mood ratings. Thought content and personality data were
collected at the end. Because the experiment manipulation on mood during the recovery period was not consistently
successful, we examined how changes in positive mood might correlate with neural activation changes to the
stressor. We are using change-point analyses to estimate for how long stress-related regions (amygdala and dMPFC)
remained active (or remained less active) from the end of the stress period into the recovery period as well as the
relationship between these regions and the positive emotion related regions such as the vMPFC and NaC. Mood
ratings and personality will be used as covariates to explain individual differences in stress recovery. This study will
show that positive emotions support stress recovery via beneficial information input to influence the appraisal system
and that this is supported by changes in connectivity between the dMPFC and vMPFC/NaC.
C – 72
TREATMENT FOR SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER ALTERS FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN EMOTION
REGULATION NEURAL CIRCUITRY
Katherine S. Young – University of California, Los Angeles; Lisa J. Burklund – University of California, Los Angeles;
Jared Torre – University of California, Los Angeles; Darby Saxbe – University of Southern California; Matthew D.
Lieberman – University of California, Los Angeles; Michelle G. Craske – University of California, Los Angeles
Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is characterized at a neurobiological level by disrupted activity in emotion regulation
neural circuitry. Previous work has demonstrated amygdala hyperreactivity and disrupted prefrontal responses to
social cues in individuals with SAD (Kim et al., 2011). While exposure-based psychological treatments effectively
reduce SAD symptoms, not all individuals respond to treatment. Better understanding of the neural mechanisms
involved offers the potential to improve treatment efficacy. In this study, we investigated functional connectivity in
emotion regulation neural circuitry in a randomized controlled treatment trial for SAD. Participants with SAD
underwent fMRI scanning while performing an implicit emotion regulation task prior to treatment (n=62). Following

	

107

12 weeks of cognitive behavioral therapy, acceptance and commitment therapy, or wait-list, participants completed a
second scan (n=42). Psychophysiological interaction analyses using amygdala seed regions demonstrated differences
between SAD and healthy control participants (HC; n=16) in right amygdala-vmPFC connectivity. SAD participants
demonstrated more negative amygdala-to-vmPFC connectivity, compared to HC participants, an effect that was
correlated with SAD symptom severity. Post-treatment symptom reduction was correlated with altered amygdala-tovm/vlPFC connectivity, independent of treatment type. Greater symptom reduction was associated with more
negative amygdala-to-vm/vlPFC connectivity. These findings suggest that effective psychological treatment for SAD
enhances amygdala-prefrontal functional connectivity.
C – 73
BIOLOGICAL AND COGNITIVE UNDERPINNINGS OF RELIGIOUS FUNDAMENTALISM
Wanting Zhong – Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago & Northwestern University; Irene Cristofori – Rehabilitation
Institute of Chicago & Northwestern University; Joseph Bulbulia – Victoria University of New Zealand; Frank Krueger
– George Mason University; Jordan Grafman – Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago & Northwestern University
Religious beliefs profoundly affect people’s lives, but their cognitive and neural pathways are poorly understood.
Although previous research has identified the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) as critical to representing
religious beliefs, the means by which vmPFC enables religious belief is uncertain. We hypothesized that the vmPFC
represents diverse religious beliefs and that a vmPFC lesion would be associated with religious fundamentalism, or
the narrowing of religious beliefs. To test this prediction, we assessed religious adherence with a widely-used
religious fundamentalism scale in a large sample of 119 patients with penetrating traumatic brain injury (pTBI). If the
vmPFC is crucial to modulating diverse personal religious experiences, we predicted that pTBI patients with lesions to
the vmPFC would exhibit greater fundamentalism, and that this would be modulated by cognitive flexibility and trait
openness. Instead, we found that participants with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) lesions have fundamentalist
beliefs similar to patients with vmPFC lesions and that the effect of a dlPFC lesion on fundamentalism was
significantly mediated by decreased cognitive flexibility and openness. These findings indicate that cognitive flexibility
and openness are necessary for flexible and adaptive religious commitment, and that such diversity of religious
thought is dependent on dlPFC functionality.

	108

NOW LIVE

First issue now published
and available free online for a year
nature.com/nathumbehav
@NatureHumBehav

