Social & Affective Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting 2012
April 20-21, Marriott Downtown
New York, NY
Local Organizers
Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University
David Amodio, New York University

Talk/Poster Selection Committee
Elliot Berkman, University of Oregon
Kateri McRae, University of Denver
Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University
Jennifer Pfeifer, University of Oregon
Jay Van Bavel, New York University
Jamil Zaki, Harvard University

SAN Executive Committee
Ralph Adolphs, Caltech
David Amodio, New York University
Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin
Elliot Berkman, University of Oregon
Todd Heatherton, Dartmouth University

Schedule-at-a-glance
Thursday, April 19
Start

End

Session

6:00 PM

9:00 PM

Registration, 2nd floor landing

Friday, April 20
Start

End

Session

8:00 AM

8:50 AM

Continental Breakfast and Registration

8:50 AM

9:00 AM

Welcome Address by Kevin Ochsner

9:00 AM

10:15 AM

Symposium Session A: Empathy

10:15 AM

10:35 AM

Coffee Break

10:35 AM

11:50 AM

Symposium Session B: Culture

11:50 AM

1:30 PM

Break for Lunch

1:30 PM

2:45 PM

Symposium Session C: Social Interaction

2:45 PM

4:15 PM

Poster Session D (Empathy, Culture, Social Interaction, Health)

4:15 PM

5:30 PM

Symposium Session E: Person Perception

6:00 PM

7:15 PM

Keynote Debate: Mirror Neurons

7:15 PM

9:00 PM

Reception

Saturday, April 21

	  

Start

End

Session

8:00 AM

9:00 AM

Continental Breakfast and Registration

9:00 AM

10:15 AM

Symposium Session F: Health

10:15 AM

10:30 AM

Coffee Break

10:30 AM

12:00 PM

Poster Session G (Person Perception, Development, Self-Control)

12:00 PM

1:30 PM

Break for Lunch

1:30 PM

2:45 PM

Symposium Session H: Development

2:45 PM

4:15 PM

Poster Session I (Emotion, Choice)

4:15 PM

5:30 PM

Symposium Session J: Emotion, Choice and Self-Control

6:00 PM

7:15 PM

Keynote Debate: Valuation and Emotion

2	  

Presentations
Session A

Empathy
Friday, April 20, 2012
9:00 - 10:15 AM
Shihui Han, Peking University
Sylvia Morelli, University of California, Los Angeles
Jamil Zaki, Harvard University
Tania Singer, Max Planck Institute
Organizer: Sylvia Morelli and Matthew Lieberman, UCLA

ABSTRACTS
MANIPULATIONS OF COGNITIVE STRATEGIES AND INTERGROUP
RELATIONSHIPS REDUCE THE RACIAL BIAS IN EMPATHIC NEURAL
RESPONSES Shihui Han, Peking University; and Feng Sheng, Peking University – Social
relationships affect empathy in humans such that empathic neural responses to perceived
pain decrease to racial out-group members more than to racial in-group members. Why
does the racial bias in empathy (RBE) occur and how can we reduce it? We hypothesized
that perceiving an other-race person as a symbol of a racial group, rather than as an
individual, decreases references to his/her personal situation and weakens empathy for
that person. This hypothesis predicts that individuating other-race persons by increasing
attention to each individual’s feelings or enclosing other-race individuals within one’s
own social group can reduce the RBE by increasing empathic neural responses to otherrace individuals. In Experiment 1, we recorded event related brain potentials from
Chinese adults as they made race judgments on Asian and Caucasian faces with pained or
neutral expressions. This experiment identified the RBE by showing that, relative to
neutral expressions, pain expressions increased neural responses at 128-188 ms after
stimulus onset over the frontal/central brain regions, and this effect was evident for samerace faces but not for other-race faces. Experiments 2 and 3 found that paying attention to
the observed individual’s feelings of pain and including other-race individuals in one’s
own team for competitions respectively eliminated the RBE by increasing neural
responses to pain expressions in other-race faces. Our results indicate that the RBE is not
inevitable and that manipulations of both cognitive strategies and intergroup
relationships can reduce RBE-related brain activity.
EMPATHY FOR POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE EMOTIONS: IMPLICATIONS FOR
BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR Sylvia A. Morelli, University of California, Los Angeles – Despite
the wealth of fMRI studies of empathy, no study has examined empathy for both positive
and negative emotions. Including both is critical to the identification of processes central
to a general empathic state and to emotion-specific empathic processes. In addition,
examining how these empathic neural responses differentially relate to daily empathic
experiences may provide insight into interpersonal behaviors. In the current investigation,
32 participants completed an fMRI session assessing empathic responses to others
experiencing happiness and anxiety. The same participants also completed a 14-day
experience-sampling study to assess daily frequencies of empathy, social connection, and

	  

3	  

prosocial behavior. Neural regions that were common to the empathic state across
emotions included areas associated with mentalizing and caregiving. Other limbic
regions (dorsal anterior cingulate, anterior insula) were more active during one of the
target emotions. In addition, participants who showed increased neural activity in regions
associated with vicarious reward (i.e. ventral striatum) and empathy (i.e. medial
prefrontal cortex) also showed higher daily frequency of shared positive emotions and
prosocial behavior. Together, these results provide evidence for a set of neural regions
that maintain or generate an empathic state across different target emotions, as well as
limbic regions that play emotion-specific roles in empathy. Futhermore, individual
differences in daily empathic experiences are reflected in empathic neural responses.
FLAVORS OF EMPATHY AND THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO PROSOCIAL
BEHAVIOR Jamil Zaki, Harvard University, Jason Mitchell, Harvard University – Empathy is
a multifaceted construct comprising distinct, but related information processing
mechanisms. Two of these mechanisms have received a great deal of attention from
human neuroimaging research: experience sharing--perceivers' tendency to vicariously
adopt the sensorimotor, visceral, and affective states of social targets--and mentalizing-perceivers' explicit cognitive inferences about targets' states. Strikingly, these two
processes engage largely distinct sets of neural structures, suggesting that they may reflect
dissociable routes for understanding and reacting to other people. Here, we examine how
and when each of these processes predict a particular "downstream" social outcome:
perceivers' decisions to act prosocially towards others. While being scanned using fMRI,
perceivers (1) passively observed targets receiving money and (2) drew explicit inferences
about targets' mental states. During passive viewing, perceivers engaged a common area
of ventromedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) when receiving rewards themselves and
observing targets receiving rewards, a common signature of experience sharing; this
common neural response further predicted prosocial giving in a separate set of trials. By
contrast, when actively drawing inferences about targets, perceivers engaged an area of
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), an area commonly associated with mentalizing,
which likewise predicted prosocial behavior. These data suggest that both experience
sharing and mentalizing can predict prosocial behavior, but in a manner that depends on
the context in which these processes are deployed.
HOW TO UNDERSTAND OTHERS’ FEELINGS: EMPATHY, SELF-OTHER
DISTINCTION AND EGOCENTRICITY BIAS Tania Singer, Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences – With the emergence of social neuroscience,
researchers have started to investigate the underpinnings of our ability to share and
understand the feelings and minds of others. I will give a short overview about the
evidence for the existence of “shared networks” underlying our ability to share feelings
derived from investigating empathic brain responses elicited by the observation of others
in pain. Moreover, I will then highlight the importance of self-other distinction in the
process of empathic understanding and present a series of behavioral, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), which
focus on the investigation of emotional egocentricity bias and the ability for self-other
distinction. More specifically, fMRI results suggest an important role of the right angular
gyrus when subjects have to disengage from self-related affective states in order to avoid
biased judgments about the others’ affective states when these are incongruent to their
own. These findings are discussed in light of recent models of social cognition.

Session B

Culture
Friday, April 20, 2012
10:35 - 11:50 AM
Jiyoung Park, University of Michigan

	  

4	  

Anne Krendi, Stanford University
Elizabeth Losin, University of California, Los Angeles
Joan Chiao, Northwestern University
Organizer: Joan Chiao, Northwestern University

ABSTRACTS
NEURAL RESPONSE (ERN) REVEALS SELF-SERVING BIAS: CULTURE MATTERS
Shinobu Kitayama, University of Michigan; and Jiyoung Park, University of Michigan – Selfserving bias may result from increased motivational significance of self-relevant (vs.
other-relevant) events. At present, however, the underlying neural mechanisms remain
unclear. Here, we assessed electrocortical responses of European American and Asian
participants as they performed a flanker task while instructed to earn as many reward
points as possible either for the self or for their same-sex friend. For European Americans,
error-related negativity (ERN) – an event-related brain potential (ERP) contingent on error
responses – was significantly greater in the self- than in the friend-condition. Moreover,
European Americans showed increased post-error slowing – an index of cognitive control
to reduce errors – in the self-condition, but not in the friend-condition. Neither of these
self-serving effects was observed among Asians, consistent with prior cross-cultural
behavioral evidence. Interdependent self-construal negatively predicted both of the two
self-serving effects. Our findings provide the first evidence for neural mechanisms
underlying self-serving bias.
CULTURE AND THE NEURAL MECHANISMS ENGAGED IN STEREOTYPE
FORMATION Anne C. Krendl, Stanford University; and Nalini Ambady, Stanford University
– Emerging research in cultural neuroscience suggests that individuals from Eastern and
Western cultures engage distinct patterns of neural activity when evaluating negative
affective information. However, it remains largely unexplored whether these differences
extend to the neural mechanisms engaged when these individuals evaluate negative social
targets, such as individuals who are stigmatized. Indeed, extensive research in social
psychology suggests that unique experiences have a powerful impact on how individuals
form impressions of outgroup members. We used a cultural neuroscience approach to
examine the effects of different cultural backgrounds on the neural mechanisms engaged
when individuals evaluate outgroup members. We recruited recent Chinese immigrants,
first generation Chinese-Americans, and Caucasians and instructed them to make passive
evaluations of outgroup members and normal controls while undergoing functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Additional measures were collected outside of the scanner
to consider individual differences such internal and external motivation to control
prejudice. Data will be presented examining the responses of U.S. Caucasian Americans,
recent Chinese immigrants, as well as individuals who have been exposed to both cultures
(first generation Chinese-Americans) when evaluating when evaluating outgroup
members.
RACE-RELATED AMYGDALA ACTIVITY EXHIBITS AN INGROUP BIAS DURING
PASSIVE FACE VIEWING Elizabeth A. Reynolds Losin, University of California, Los
Angeles; Marco Iacoboni, University of California, Los Angeles; and Mirella Dapretto, University
of California, Los Angeles - There is currently debate over the amygdala’s role in race
processing. Most studies have found heightened amygdala activity to faces of racial
outgroup members or members of a stigmatized racial group (African Americans). Such
responses have been found across fMRI tasks requiring a variety of different judgments
about the social category or spatial location of faces. These findings suggest the amygdala
may instantiate negative associations with outgroup races. A few studies, however, have
demonstrated that these amygdala responses can be eliminated – or even reversed to
ingroup biases – during judgments that direct attention away from race (e.g.,

	  

5	  

individuating judgments), or engage culturally-specific processing (e.g., fear
identification). It is not clear whether studies demonstrating outgroup biases in amygdala
activity reflect the default response of the amygdala in racial processing, or are instead an
artifact of the particular judgments made. Many studies also had small sample sizes and a
single racial group of participants (white), making it problematic to interpret these
findings in terms of general ingroup/outgroup biases, as results could apply only to a
specific racial group of participants responding to a particular racial outgroup. We aimed
to shed light on this debate by investigating amygdala responses to race when no explicit
judgment was required. We tested 40 participants from two racial groups (20 white [EA],
and 20 African American [AA]), while they passively viewed still portraits of actors
representing three racial groups (EA, AA and Chinese American [CH]) – one racial
ingroup and two racial outgroups for each participant group. If the outgroup or AA biases
found in prior studies reflect the default response of the amygdala to individuals from
another racial group, the we would expect to see this effects when no judgment is
required, in both groups of participants, and across two racial outgroups. We performed
a bilateral amygdala region of interest analysis using the Harvard-Oxford probabilistic
atlas. We extracted parameter estimates of activity from this region and entered them into
a subject race (EA, AA) X actor race (EA, AA, CH) repeated measures ANOVA, which
yielded a significant actor race by subject race interaction. Planned comparisons revealed
more amygdala activity in response to ingroup faces (EA faces for EA participants; AA
faces for AA participants) than outgroup members (AA and CH faces for EA participants;
EA and CH faces for AA participants). This ingroup bias was significant across both
groups of participants and for two different racial outgroups, suggesting this effects truly
reflects an ingroup bias rather than a race-specific effect. These results demonstrate that
when people passively view individuals from different racial groups, the amygdala
responds more strongly to racial ingroup rather than outgroup members. We hypothesize
this effect may relate to the inherent motivational salience of ingroup members as
reflected in ingroup favoritism and ingroup advantages for face recognition and memory.
More broadly, these findings suggest that processing negative associations is not the
default response of the amygdala in racial processing. Thus, contributing to the growing
literature on amygdala responses to positive stimuli that are motivationally relevant.
CULTURAL INFLUENCES ON THE NEURAL BASIS OF PERSPECTIVE-TAKING
Joan Y. Chiao, Northwestern University; and Tokiko Harada,, Nagoya University – Cultural
values of individualism and collectivism influence how people think about themselves
and their relation to the social and physical environment. Individualists think of people as
relatively independent of each other, whereas collectivists think of people as highly
interconnected with one another. Collectivists have been shown to take the perspective of
others to a greater extent, compared to individualists who are more likely to adopt a firstperson perspective. However, whether cultural values of individualism and collectivism
affect neural responses underlying perspective-taking remain unknown. Here we
investigated how cultural values of individualism and collectivism modulate the neural
basis of perspective taking using fMRI. During scanning, participants took either a firstperson perspective (1Ps) of themselves or their close friend (1Po) or a third-person
perspective of their close friend (3Po). Results indicate that people who were more
individualistic showed greater VMPFC response when adopting the first-person
perspective of themselves. By contrast, people who were more collectivistic showed
greater VMPFC response when adopting the first-person perspective of their close friend
and greater DMPFC response when adopting the third-person perspective of their close
friend. Taken together, these results suggest that collectivists recruit a greater extent of
neural resource within medial prefrontal cortex when adopting the perspective of close
others, facilitating their ability to conform to collectivistic cultural norms of social
harmony and interdependence.

	  

6	  

Session C

Social Interaction
Friday, April 20, 2012
1:30 - 2:45 PM
Ray Lee, Princeton University
Pranjal Mehta, University of Oregon
Mirre Stallen, Erasmus University Rotterdam
Karin Roelofs, Radboud University Nijmegen

ABSTRACTS
THE DEFAULT MODE NETWORK COUPLING IN CERTAIN SOCIAL
INTERACTIONS OBSERVED IN DYADIC FMRI Ray Lee, Princeton University - The
default mode network (DMN) in the human brain is often associated with the brain’s
intrinsic activities that are not engaged with the external world. However, such a selfreferential nature might also play a role in social identity. Using a newly developed
dyadic fMRI (dfMRI) which can scan two human brains simultaneously inside one MRI
scanner, some initial evidence suggests that the DMN could also have a social effect in
certain relationships among certain type of subject pairs. About 20 dfMRI studies were
conducted with subject-pairs lying on their sides, face-to-face, inside the magnet bore. The
subject-pairs were instructed to periodically open and close their eyes, either
simultaneously or alternately. The functional data was post-processed with the software
package FSL (Oxford University, UK). The ICA results show that: (1) In the majority of
pairs, individual DMNs are decoupled, each DMN is a separate independent component;
(2) In the romantically involved pairs, the DMNs of the less affectionate ones are often
intact, but the DMNs of the more affectionate ones become difficult to be identified; (3) In
the case of dominant/passive pair, the DMN of the dominant subject is coupled with the
lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) of the passive one. These preliminary results seem to
indicate that in a social resting state, DMN has the characterization of self, and such social
identification could affect other via romance or aggressive gaze.
THE ROLE OF TESTOSTERONE IN STATUS-SEEKING BEHAVIOR Pranjal Mehta,
University of Oregon; Erik Knight, University of Oregon; Veerle van Son, Radboud University,
Donders Institute for Cognitive Neuroimaging; Alan Sanfey, Radboud University, Donders
Institute for Cognitive Neuroimaging; Ale Smidts, Erasmus University, Rotterdam School of
Management; and Karin Roelofs, Radboud University, Donders Institute for Cognitive
Neuroimaging - Scholars have argued that testosterone plays a role in status-seeking
behaviors (e.g., competitive and dominant behaviors, Mazur & Booth, 1998; Mehta &
Josephs, 2006), but to date no human research has explicitly tested the causal role of
testosterone in status-seeking. Further, although correlational studies suggest that higher
testosterone is related to increased reactivity to wins and losses in competitive statusrelated encounters, experimental studies have yet to investigate context-dependent effects
of testosterone on human social behavior. Here we sublingually administered testosterone
or placebo to 54 healthy women in a double-blind between-subjects design. Four hours
after administration participants were scanned with fMRI in 90 trials of a competitive task
in which the opponent’s social status (lower status, same status, or higher status) and the
outcome of the competition (win/lose) were experimentally manipulated. After each trial
of the competition, participants chose whether or not to compete again against the same
player in a second round of competition. Results revealed a statistically significant status x
competition outcome interaction on competitive behavior regardless of treatment
condition; participants showed heightened behavioral sensitivity to wins and losses when

	  

7	  

their opponent was higher status. Importantly, there was a statistically significant effect of
testosterone on competitive behavior such that testosterone treatment increased the
behavioral discrepancy between win and loss trials compared to placebo treatment
(outcome sensitivity effect). The findings provide causal evidence for a context-dependent
effect of testosterone on status-relevant behaviors. Preliminary imaging analyses will
examine neural mechanisms for hormonal influences on social behavior, and implications
of the findings for biosocial theories of human status hierarchies will be discussed.
THE ROLE OF OXYTOCIN IN SOCIAL NORM ENFORCEMENT Mirre Stallen,
Erasmus University Rotterdam, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour; Amber
Heijne, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour; Ale Smidts, Erasmus University
Rotterdam; Carsten K.W. de Dreu, University of Amsterdam; and Alan G. Sanfey, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour - The hormone oxytocin has long been
considered important for prosocial behavior, with researchers exploring the relationship
between oxytocin and factors such as trust, empathy, cooperation, and generosity.
However, contrary to the popular belief of oxytocin being a ‘love hormone’, recent studies
are beginning to suggest that oxytocin does not necessarily lead to indiscriminately
prosocial behavior, but rather that it plays a role in a broader range of social behaviors.
The aim of this study was to explore the possible effects of oxytocin on social norm
enforcement. If oxytocin does indeed play a key role in social behavior, then does
administration of oxytocin foster the choice to punish social norm violators? Or might
oxytocin lead to a greater willingness to compensate the victim of a social norm violation?
To investigate the role of oxytocin in social norm enforcement, we conducted a betweensubject, double-blind, placebo-controlled, experiment in which participants played three
versions of a monetary game while undergoing functional neuroimaging. These games
were: a second-party punishment game, a third-party punishment game and a third-party
compensation game. Hypothesizing that the effects of oxytocin do extend into a wider
range of social behavior, we predicted that participants who received oxytocin would
respond more intensely to social norm violations than participants in the placebo group,
and thereby show increased punishment and/or compensation behavior. Our behavioral
results demonstrated that oxytocin did increase sensitivity to social norm violations.
Participants in the oxytocin group showed a greater willingness to punish those who
violated a social norm. This effect was present in both punishment games, demonstrating
that the effects of oxytocin on social norm enforcement extend into the domain of altruistic
punishment. Interestingly, oxytocin did not enhance compensation behavior, thereby
supporting the hypothesis that the positive effects of oxytocin on prosocial behavior are
context-dependent. These results suggest that oxytocin is involved in a broader range of
social behaviors than has been previously shown. Additionally, we collected
neuroimaging data to assess the neural mechanisms by which oxytocin mediates social
norm enforcement. Both behavioral and neuroimaging data will be presented.
NEURO-ENDOCRINE CONTROL OF SOCIAL MOTIVATIONAL BEHAVIOR Karin
Roelofs, Radboud University Nijmegen; Inge Volman, Radboud University Nijmegen; Ivan Toni,
Radboud University Nijmegen - Social motivational behavior can be roughly divided into
social approach and social avoidance. On social approach-avoidance tasks, people
generally tend to avoid social threat cues (such as angry faces), whereas they tend to
approach social affiliation cues (such as smiling faces). We are interested in the effects of
psychological and neurobiological markers of social anxiety and aggression on the neural
control of those automatic social action tendencies. Based on animal studies, we predicted
that the steroid hormones cortisol and testosterone, as well as variations in serotonin
transporter availability would affect frontal control over amygdala-driven social
approach-avoidance tendencies. I will present a series of fMRI studies in which we tested
these hypotheses. First, I will present effects of individual differences in social anxiety and
aggression-related symptoms, hormones (cortisol and testosterone) and genetic variations
(serotonin transporter gene polymorphisms) on frontal-amygdala connectivity during an
fMRI adapted social approach-avoidance task. In addition, to be able to infer causal
relations, we investigated effects of direct hormone (testosterone) and neural (Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation) manipulations on social approach-avoidance behavior. I will report
connectivity analyses, including Dynamic Causal Modelling, suggesting that down-

	  

8	  

regulation by the anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC) of the amygdala is critical in overriding
automatic social approach-avoidance tendencies. These findings have implications for our
understanding of the neuroendocrine regulation of social motivational behavior in
healthy individuals, as well as in patients with social motivational disorders, like social
phobia and psychopathy.

Session D

Poster Presentations: Session 1
Empathy, Culture, Social Interaction, Health
Friday, April 20, 2012
2:45 - 4:15 PM

Session E

Person Perception
Friday, April 20, 2012
4:15 - 5:30 PM
Jamil Palacios Bhanji, University of Texas at Austin
Nicola Sportorno, Université Lyon
James P. Morris, University of Virginia
Antonia Hamilton, University of Nottingham

ABSTRACTS
FROM SNAP JUDGMENTS TO FINAL IMPRESSIONS: NEURAL REGIONS
INVOLVED IN CHANGING ONE’S MIND ABOUT OTHERS Jamil Palacios Bhanji,
University of Texas at Austin; and Jennifer S. Beer, University of Texas at Austin – People may
make snap judgments of others based on factors that do not tell the whole story, such as
the person’s physical appearance. However, people will change those snap judgments
when further information suggests that they should change their mind about a person.
For example, a manager may make a positive snap judgment of a job applicant’s
competence that is driven by the applicant’s physical attractiveness, but then may
reevaluate after hearing the applicant’s poorly spoken answers in a job interview. What
factors determine how much an evaluation of another person will change from a snap
judgment to a final impression, and conversely how much a snap judgment will persist in
the face of more complete information? We use fMRI data to examine how the brain
processes information to reevaluate snap judgments of other people. Participants judged
job applicants’ competence after viewing only a picture (snap judgment) and judged them
again after viewing videos of the applicants’ interview responses (reevaluation).
Competence-related statements in the videos portrayed applicants at parametrically
varying levels of competence. Participants’ snap judgments were higher for physically
attractive compared to less physically attractive applicants, but this difference was
diminished in reevaluations after the videos. Dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC)
and lateral temporal cortex activity increased with parametrically decreasing levels of
portrayed competence in the videos. Furthermore, DMPFC and lateral temporal cortex

	  

9	  

activity was associated with the degree to which participants lowered their competence
judgments from the snap judgment to the reevaluation. In other words, greater DMPFC
and lateral temporal cortex activity was associated with greater change from a snap
judgment to a final impression. Left amygdala activity was greater when participants
judged less physically attractive compared to more attractive applicants. Left amygdala
activity also increased with lower competence snap judgments. The findings suggest that
neural distinctions in processing information about others may influence whether getting
to know someone leads to a change of mind or whether a snap judgment persists. DMPFC
and lateral temporal cortex activity may relate to changing one’s mind about somebody
whereas amygdala activity may relate to the persistence of a snap judgment.
“OF COURSE THERE IS NO THEORY OF MIND ACTIVATION IN VERBAL
IRONY”: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Nicola Spotorno, Université Lyon; Eric Koun,
Université Lyon; Jérôme Prado, Northwestern University; Jean-Baptiste Van Der Henst,
Université Lyon; and Ira A. Noveck; Université Lyon – Verbal irony provides prima facie
evidence that the linguistic code is insufficient for communicating the complete meaning
of an utterance. Consider an opera singer who tells her interlocutor: a)“Tonight we gave a
superb performance!” when the performance was clearly awful. The ironic speaker
expresses a dissociated (mocking) attitude. It is now well established that communicators
interpret others’ mental states/attitudes through what has been called “Theory of Mind”
(ToM). Thanks to a range of clever neuroimagery studies, there is now some general
agreement about the best candidate regions for a neural-ToM-network. They are the right
and left temporal parietal junction (rTPJ, lTPJ), the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and
the precuneus (PC). The present work is the first that aims to show how these regions are
integral to language comprehension. It demonstrates that the ToM network becomes
active when a participant is understanding irony and, moreover, it shows ― through
Psychophysiological Interactions (PPI) analyses ― that ToM activity is directly linked
with language comprehension processes. 20 healthy adults were tested in an event related
fMRI design (1.5 T scanner) while they read 60 7-sentence-long stories. Twenty-four
stories were devoted to the present investigation. The first five lines of the stories in the
Ironic condition set up a negative context (e.g., one where a performance was
disappointing) which was followed by a target-line delivering an ironic utterance (e.g.,a))
and by a wrap-up sentence. Matched Literal stories were practically identical except that
the context was positive (e.g., the performance was good); the Target-line remains the
same as above. We also included Decoy stories in which a negative event leads to a nonironic/banal utterance. The decoys prevent negative contexts from being cues for ironic
remarks. We conduced also an analysis based on the regions of interest (ROIs) that were
isolated in a recent meta-analysis of the literature on ToM. The functional connectivity
was estimated using PPI. Data were analysed using standard SPM8 methods. The
Ironic>Literal contrast on the target sentence in both whole brain (cluster-wise FDR
corrected p<.05 and voxel-wise uncorrected p<.001) and ROIs analysis shows that verbal
irony understanding activated the entire network usually associated with ToM (MPFC,
rTPJ, lTPJ and PC). Interestingly, PPI reveals that the ironic condition prompts an increase
of functional connectivity between the left IFG of the language network, on the one hand,
and the MPFC and the rTPJ (from the ToM network) on the other. The present data can be
considered a first step in determining the extent to which language processing interacts
with our ability to understand others’ mental states. Although verbal irony was our test
bed, we do not believe that linguistically-driven ToM activity is limited to such cases.
What remains to be seen is the extent to which one can find ToM activity in other kinds of
pragmatic inference-making.
EPIGENETIC VARIABILITY IN OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR GENE (OXTR) IS
ASSOCIATED WITH NEURAL ENDOPHENOTYPES OF SOCIAL PERCEPTION
James P. Morris, University of Virginia; Allison Jack, University of Virginia; and Jessica J.
Connelly, University of Virginia - The oxytocin pathway has been implicated in a myriad of
social behaviors in mammals. Genetic studies have identified common variants in the
oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR), rs53576 and rs2254298, that are associated with individual
variability in social behavior, in the structure and function of brain regions supporting
social perception, and in autism spectrum disorders (ASD), which are characterized by

	  

10	  

atypical social behavior. These studies generally consider candidate single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) as markers of genetic variability and brain structure or function as
an endophenotype of behavior. In order to address biological and statistical limitations of
the SNP approach, examination of additional molecular markers such as epigenetic
variation is required. DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that can result in
changes in gene function through changes in gene expression. Recent work has suggested
that, for at least some cytosine residues in the genome, DNA methylation can vary within
the human population, remain stable across time, and be predictive of phenotypic
variability. In the case of OXTR, several CpG sites that influence expression of the OXTR
gene are variably methylated in humans and have been shown to be more highly
methylated in individuals with ASD. Importantly, these results were obtained in DNA
derived from both the brain and the blood, suggesting that methylation level in the blood
could be used as a surrogate for methylation level in the brain. In the present study, we
hypothesized that epigenetic variability could be associated with individual differences in
brain activity underlying social perception in the general population. To test our
hypothesis, forty-two neurologically normal volunteers submitted blood samples and
then participated in two common social perception paradigms while undergoing fMRI.
The first paradigm assessed activity associated with processing facial expressions of
emotion. Here we found an allele specific relationship between DNA methylation and
activity in the amygdala during emotional face perception. Specifically, carriers of the
rs53576 GG genotype show a strong positive association between DNA methylation of
OXTR and amygdala activity. The second paradigm assessed the response of the brain to
visual displays of socially relevant motion by means of modified Heider and Simmel
films. Here we found an allele specific relationship between DNA methylation and
activity in brain regions often implicated in mentalizing behavior. Specifically, carriers of
the rs2254298 GG genotype showed a positive relationship between DNA methylation
and activity in the posterior superior temporal sulcus, anterior cingulate and temporal
pole during perception of socially relevant motion. These data demonstrate that at least
some epigenetic variability may be assessed via peripheral blood cells and that this
variability may substantially improve our ability to explain individual differences in
imaging genetic association studies.
MACHIAVELLIAN MIMICRY Antonia Hamilton, University of Nottingham; and Yin Wang,
University of Nottingham – Unconscious mimicry of other people's actions is a ubiquitous
social behaviour which is influenced in a subtle fashion by different social cues. Here we
describe a series of new findings from behavioural and fMRI studies of mimicry which
reveal the mechanisms controlling mimicry responses. In all these studies, we measure
mimicry as the difference in reaction time between trials where participants observe an
action congruent to the action they perform, and trials where participants observe an
action which is incongruent. We find that eye contact from an interaction partner just
before a participant’s response rapidly and specifically enhances mimicry, but only if the
eye contact remains during the response phase. fMRI with dynamic causal modeling
reveals that this effect is due to top-down control signals from medial prefrontal cortex
impacting on visuomotor processing in mirror neuron systems. We further show that
control of mimicry is not a simple process of summing positive or negative social cues, but
is subtly guided by the character of different interaction partners. For example,
participants mimic more when an interaction partner is described as high-status and nasty
than when a partner has high-status and is nice. They also mimic more when primed
with self-relevant prosocial sentences or when primed with third-party anti-social
sentences. This talk will bring these diverse and sometimes counter-intuitive results
together under a framework of Machiavellian mimicry and will highlight important
directions for future research into the interaction of top-down control processes and
automatic responding in social behaviour.

	  

11	  

Debate

Keynote Debate: Mirror Neurons
Friday, April 20, 2012
6:00 – 7:15 PM
Christian Keysers, University Medical Center Groningen, KNAW
Geoff Bird, University of London

F O R M A T and C O N T E N T
Each keynote debate will begin with a 20-minute presentation by each speaker
followed by 5 minutes for each speaker to offer a rebuttal and questions from the
audience. This keynote debate will focus on the status and functions of the putative
mirror neuron system (MNS) in humans. Christian Keysers will speak first, presenting
one perspective on the functions of the MNS in action perception and other behaviors.
Geoff Bird will speak second, offering an alternative take on the functions of MNS.

Session F

Health
Saturday, April 21, 2012
9:00 - 10:15 AM
Naomi Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles
Peter Gianaros, University of Pittsburgh
Steve Manuck, University of Pittsburgh
Tor Wager, University of Colorado, Boulder
Organizer: Naomi Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles

ABSTRACTS
FROM BRAIN TO BODY AND BODY TO BRAIN: EXAMINING THE NEURAL
MECHANISMS THAT LINK SOCIAL DISCONNECTION WITH INFLAMMATION
Naomi I. Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles - Considerable research has
demonstrated the importance of social relationships for physical health; those who report
feeling more socially isolated show an increased risk of all-cause morality and several
inflammatory-related diseases. Although it has been hypothesized that the relationship
between subjective social isolation (‘social disconnection’) and health may be due to the
inflammatory-enhancing effects of social disconnection, it is also possible that increases in
inflammatory activity contribute to a heightened sense of social disconnection. In this talk,
I will review two studies that examine the reciprocal links between social disconnection
and inflammation. The first study demonstrates that neural regions implicated in
processing physical and social pain play a role in the downstream effects of social
rejection on inflammatory activity. The second study demonstrates that these same neural
regions appear to be involved in the upstream effects of inflammation on increased

	  

12	  

feelings of social disconnection and depressed mood. I will discuss the implications of
these findings in light of a hypothesized overlap in the neural systems underlying
physical and social pain and will suggest that the physiologic responses which have been
adaptive in the context of physical pain may be observed in response to social pain
because of the overlap in these systems.
DO INFLAMMATORY PATHWAYS LINK SOCIOECONOMIC INEQUALITIES TO
THE INTEGRITY OF BRAIN NETWORKS? Peter J. Gianaros, University of Pittsburgh Socioeconomic disadvantage confers risk for poor physical health across the lifespan. Such
risk may be partly attributable to inflammatory influences on the integrity of brain
networks. This presentation will review findings from a study testing specifically whether
socioeconomic disadvantage relates to the integrity of white matter tracts connecting
regions in distributed brain networks via anthropometric, behavioral, and molecular
factors associated with systemic inflammation. In this study, healthy adults (N=155, aged
30-50 years, 78 men) completed protocols assessing indicators of socioeconomic position
(SEP), anthropometric and behavioral measures of adiposity and cigarette smoking,
measures of circulating C-reactive protein (CRP), and assessments of white matter
integrity by diffusion tensor imaging. Path analyses were used to quantify associations
between multilevel SEP indicators and measures of white matter tract integrity, as well as
indirect mediating paths. Results showed that those completing less schooling, earning
lower incomes, and residing in disadvantaged neighborhoods exhibited graded decreases
in white matter fractional anisotropy and increases in radial diffusivity, relative to their
more advantaged counterparts. Moreover, analysis of indirect paths showed that these
effects were accounted for by elevated adiposity and higher smoking rates among
disadvantaged individuals. The latter findings implicated systemic inflammation as a
plausible mediator of reduced tract integrity. This inference was supported by the
observation that CRP partially mediated anthropometric and behavioral paths from SEP
to tract integrity. Socioeconomic disadvantage may relate to emergent aspects of ill health
via inflammatory factors that impact the integrity of distributed brain networks.
EARLY FAMILY ENVIRONMENT COVARIES WITH PUBERTAL TIMING AND
MIDLIFE CARDIOMETABOLIC RISK AS A FUNCTION OF POLYMORPHIC
VARIATION IN ESTROGEN RECEPTOR-Α (ESR1) Stephen B. Manuck, University of
Pittsburgh - Life History Theory accounts for variation in the developmental trajectories of
organisms as a function of unfolding environmental conditions, which might be predicted
from circumstances of early rearing. Deficient maternal nurturance of female rat pups has
been shown, for instance, to hasten pubertal development and potentiate early sexual
behavior, mediated in part via epigenetic alteration in the expression of estrogen receptorα (ER-α) in brain regions regulating hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal function. In
analogous observations on a sample of 455 European American women (45.1±6.6 yr), we
found that individuals raised in families characterized by discord and an absence of close
interpersonal relationships reached menarche earlier and gave birth at a younger age than
counterparts reared in families described as cohesive and lacking in conflict. In apparent
gene x environment interaction, moreover, adverse family relationships were associated
with earlier pubertal development primarily in individuals homozygous for the minor
alleles of two prominently studied polymorphisms of the gene encoding ER-α (ESR1;
rs9304799, rs22234693). Additionally, the same interaction of ESR1 genotype with quality
of the rearing environment predicted women’s heightened cardiovascular risk, as seen on
biomarkers of insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, adiposity, and systemic inflammation.
Together, these findings suggest that genotype-dependent influences of the childhood
psychosocial environment may extend over the lifecourse to affect both developmental
timing and later health status. More generally, they support predictions from Life History
Theory, which posit that cues to future risk and uncertainty (such as early life adversities)
occasion life history trade-offs that prioritize accelerated reproductive maturation over
allocation of metabolic resources to continued growth and development or long-term
somatic maintenance.

	  

13	  

THOUGHTS AS THINGS: CORTICAL-SUBCORTICAL SYSTEMS CONNECTING
THE MIND AND BODY Tor D. Wager, University of Colorado, Boulder - It is widely
believed that the contents of thought, and in particular the meaning ascribed to situations
and events, can influence health in important ways. But how, and where, are such
thoughts formed in the brain, and how do they influence the rest of the body and
brain? Neurons in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) project directly to the
subcortical and brainstem centers that regulate the autonomic and endocrine systems.
Here, I will argue that a central function of the vmPFC is to integrate information from
several sources into representations of affective meaning – conceptualizations of the
significance of sensory and internal cues for physical and social health. Thus, the vmPFC
is an important part of the way that the contents of thought influence the body. After
making this central argument, I will review data on the ways in which conceptual
meaning is related to physiological outcomes and evidence on the role of pathways
connecting vmPFC to hypothalamic and brainstem nuclei in mediating these effects.

	  
Session G

Poster Presentations: Session 2
Person Perception, Development, and Self-Control
Saturday, April 21, 2012
10:30 AM – 12:00 PM

Session H

Development
Saturday, April 21, 2012
1:30 – 2:45 PM
Jennifer A. Silvers, Columbia University
Leah Somerville, Weill Cornell Medical college
Shir Atzil, Bar-Ilan University
Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University of Oregon

ABSTRACTS
DEVELOPMENTAL EFFECTS ON THE NEURAL BASES OF EMOTION
REGULATION OF SOCIAL STIMULI Jennifer A. Silvers, Columbia University; Jocelyn Shu,
Columbia University; Jochen Weber, Columbia University; Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia
University - Adolescence is a critical time for the development of self-regulatory abilities
that support healthy social and emotional functioning throughout the life span. While
prior work has demonstrated age-related differences in passive viewing of socioemotional
stimuli and in cognitive control tasks, little research has examined the development of the
ability to use cognitive strategies to control emotional responses to socioemotional stimuli.
The present study sought to do just that by scanning 39 healthy individuals aged 10-22
years (M=16.29, SD=3.75) while they performed an emotion regulation task involving
social stimuli. On each trial, participants viewed an aversive or neutral social image while
either drawing themselves closer to the emotional details of the picture (“close” trials) or

	  

14	  

mentally distancing themselves from such details (“far” trials). At the conclusion of each
trial, participants rated their negative affect. Across all ages, participants reported
significantly more negative affect for close/negative than close/neutral trials (‘emotional
reactivity’) and significantly less negative affect for far/negative trials than close/negative
trials (‘regulation success’). While emotional reactivity did not vary with age, regulation
success improved significantly. Age predicted greater recruitment of dorsomedial and
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dmPFC and dlPFC), two brain regions known to support
emotion regulation in adults, for the far>close contrast (FWE, p<.05). Additionally, a
single-level random-effects mediation analysis revealed that dmPFC was a significant
mediator of the relationship between age and regulation success. To assess whether
distancing exerted sustained effects on affective processing, we next examined neural
responses while participants passively viewed the same images five minutes after
completing the regulation task. Regulation success at the time of task predicted less
amygdala responsivity during the re-presentation period for images from which
participants had previously distanced themselves in comparison to pictures from which
they had previously immersed themselves. Taken together, the present research suggests
that emotional regulation capacity for social stimuli improves over the course of
adolescence and that this may be supported by maturing prefrontal-subcortical circuits.
AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON COGNITIVE CONTROL IN ADOLESCENCE Leah
Somerville, Weill Cornell Medical College; BJ Casey, Weill Cornell Medical College - Some
accounts of adolescents liken them to “mini-adults”, whose psychological capabilities
consistently fall between that of younger and older individuals. However, research has
begun to identify contexts in which adolescent behavior violates linear patterns, instead
showing unique behavioral trends relative to both children and adults. Across a number
of studies, contexts of heightened emotion have been related to selective impairments in
cognitive control and decision making in adolescents. This presentation will highlight
findings demonstrating that the presence of positive emotional cues interrupt impulse
control to a greater extent during adolescence than during other times of life. Functional
MRI findings suggest that this nonlinear behavior change is paralleled by a selective
amplification in the recruitment of affective valuation systems in the brain during
adolescence, paired with an intermediate engagement of cognitive control circuitry. These
findings offer clues to the neural mechanisms that give rise to unique behavioral patterns
of adolescents, which may inform the developmental trajectories of real-world behaviors
such as risk-taking.
SPECIFYING THE NEUROBIOLOGICAL BASIS OF HUMAN ATTACHMENT:
BRAIN, HORMONES, AND BEHAVIOR IN POSTPARTUM MOTHERS AND
FATHERS Atzil S, Bar-Ilan University; Hendler T., Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel
Aviv Univesity; Weintraub Y., Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center; Feldman R., Bar-Ilan
University - Parental neurobiology manifests in social and motivational brain-systems. The
integration between these two systems could possibly explain the variability in parental
attachment, pointing out similarities and differences among mothers and fathers, and
between them. While extent research has addressed the brain-basis of mothering, only few
studies assessed the neural-basis of human fathering. The current study is the first to
address the coordinated neurobiology of mothering and fathering by assessing the
parents' fMRI response to a dynamic, ecologically-valid infant stimuli and testing the
maternal and paternal brain-synchronization in response to their own infant.
Additionally, we address the specifications of each gender parental response and the
parents' plasma Oxytocin and Vasopressin association with their brain responses to the
infant. fMRI scans were performed on 29 mothers and 15 fathers while they observed twominute movies of their own infant-related stimuli. Control videos presented unfamiliar
infants. Video vignettes were also used for behavioral analysis, yielding a measure of
mother-infant synchrony. To detect the brain areas that synchronize in parental brain
responses, we developed an inter-couple correlation analysis. To evaluate the neural
differences between mothers and fathers, a GLM as well as functional connectivity maps
were computed. Covariate analyses assessed the brain responses that correlate to the
plasma levels of Oxytocin and Vasopressin. Last, mothers' brains were assessed according
to their synchrony with the infant. The results of the inter-couple-correlation demonstrate

	  

15	  

synchrony between mothers’ and fathers’ brains in visual-cortex, motor cortices, IPL, IFG,
and insula when responding to their infant. The differences between mothers and fathers
focus on the right-amygdala and the right-temporal pole, where mothers had higher
activations. Fathers show higher activations in the dPFC. The connectivity analysis reveals
that mothers display a limbic network with right-amygdala, including the collateral
amygdala and STS. In contrast, fathers display cortical functional correlations to the rightamygdala in parietal, occipital and frontal gyri. Oxytocin and Vasopressin correlated
differently to brain responses of mothers and fathers. Oxytocin correlated to limbic areas
including ventral-ACC, amygdala and NAcc only in mothers. Vasopressin correlated only
in fathers to social cognition areas including IFG, temporal pole and IPL. Additionally,
maternal neural networks were differentiated by the mother-infant synchrony:
Synchronous moms were characterized by higher NACc activations and DMPFC
involvement. Intrusive moms had higher amygdala and OFC activations. Parents’ brain
responses to baby stimuli involve two networks: Sub-cortical/affective areas may process
the intuitive approach of a parent to a baby, while cognitive 'Theory Of Mind' areas
integrate a complex synchronous relationship with the baby. Whereas mothers and fathers
are synchronized in social cognition areas, the anxiety and vigilance response may be
unique to mothers. Mothers showed greater activation at limbic-motivation areas and
such activation was associated with their Oxytocin levels, suggesting a more intuitive
approach to infant care. Fathers exhibited greater response in cognitive areas related to
emotion modulation and mirror systems, which may suggest a more cognitive response.
Additionally, the outcome of maternal behavior depends on the combination between the
affective and social-cognition networks.
WHAT DEVELOPMENT, DISORDERS, AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
HIGHLIGHT ABOUT THE NEURAL SYSTEMS SUPPORTING SELF-PROCESSING
Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University of Oregon - A rich area of study in the social and affective
neurosciences is that of the brain systems supporting various aspects of self-processing. A
strong body of evidence suggests the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is preferentially
engaged during self-appraisals. Meanwhile, a small but growing list of recent studies
identifies additional regions that may also be important during self-appraisals, including
ventral striatum (VS), middle cingulate cortex (MCC) and temporo-parietal junction (TPJ).
Despite this intense research focus, we are just beginning to understand the
developmental trajectories of brain function in these regions during self-appraisals,
including relevant group and individual differences in these trajectories. In this
presentation, I will integrate several new studies that help to flesh out this picture, and
further propose that this evidence should influence how we think about the neural
systems supporting self-processing. Previous cross-sectional studies comparing young
adults with either children or adolescents (Pfeifer et al., 2007, 2009) suggested activity in
mPFC during self-appraisals decreases by adulthood. However, longitudinal analyses
may provide better traction on the precise developmental trajectory. In an ongoing study,
over 60 neurotypical 10-year-old children were recruited, and have since returned at ages
13 and 16. Retention in the sample exceeds fifty percent. In the fMRI paradigm,
participants listened to short phrases in the social and academic domains, and engaged in
social or academic appraisals of self and another well-known target (Harry Potter). The
longitudinal technique allowed for the identification of various linear and non-linear
trends in the data. For example, responses in ventral mPFC during self > other increased
specifically from age 10 to 13 (Pfeifer et al., in prep). In addition, there were highly stable
responses across timepoints in key regions of interest. Other-appraisals elicited more
activity in medial posterior parietal and retrosplenial cortex (mPPC/RSC), while selfappraisals elicited more activity in perigenual/rostral anterior cingulate cortex, VS, and
MCC. In this developmental sample, social self-appraisals were particularly likely to elicit
VS activity. Furthermore, longitudinal changes in task-dependent functional connectivity
suggest that with development, mPPC/RSC and dorsal mPFC become more tightly
coupled during other > self (Veroude et al., in prep). Other relevant individual and group
differences we have observed provide additional insights about neural functioning during
self-processing. For example, we found that differentiation between self and other in
ventral mPFC is lacking in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD;
Pfeifer et al., under review). In neurotypical children and adolescents who comprised the

	  

16	  

matched control group for those with ASD, greater self-other differentiation in ventral
mPFC was associated with enhanced parent-reported social competencies. In another
cross-sectional study from our lab, interactions between age group, target of appraisal,
and domain of appraisal identified VS and TPJ as key regions of interest, although here
we observed physical self-appraisals trumped the saliency of social self-appraisals in early
adolescence (Jankowski et al., in prep). Together, these studies of development, disorders,
and individual differences enrich our understanding of the neural systems supporting
self-processing in important ways.

Session I

Poster Presentations: Session 3
Emotion and Choice
Saturday, April 21, 2012
2:45 – 4:15 PM

Session J

Emotion, Choice and Self-Control
Saturday, April 21, 2012
4:15 – 5:30 PM
Christian Waugh, Wake Forest University
J. David Creswell, Carnegie Mellon University
Ajay Satpute, Northeastern University
Elliot Berkman, University of Oregon

ABSTRACTS
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF EMOTION PROCESSING IN THE BRAIN Christian
Waugh, Wake Forest University - Emotions happen over time. From the initial appraisal of
an emotional event that can occur within hundreds of milliseconds (Schupp, et al., 2000)
to event-induced moods that can endure for weeks (McCullough, Orsulak, Brandon, &
Akers, 2007). Although often ignored empirically, time is an important parameter in most
major theories of emotion. Process-models of emotion, for example, have emphasized that
emotions endure and change over time, and that temporal approaches to understanding
emotions should yield discoveries about how emotions are fundamentally processed
(Larsen, Augustine, & Prizmic, 2009). Despite the importance of timing in understanding
emotional experience, it has been mostly ignored in neuroimaging studies. The reason is
simple: traditional functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) statistical techniques do
not estimate time. The overwhelming majority of fMRI analyses model the data with
canonical gamma-based hemodynamic response functions (HRFs; Friston, Jezzard, &
Turner, 1994). When these canonical HRFs are used to model the data, only one parameter
– height – is allowed to vary. The temporal parameters of the HRF, such as the delay and
dispersion, are typically fixed which does not allow for the estimation of possible
temporal dynamics of the underlying blood oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD)
response. There is a delay from neural activity to measurable BOLD response (Bandettini,
Jesmanowicz, Wong, & Hyde, 1993), so these time-invariant HRFs only assess

	  

17	  

hypothetical neural activity occurring in the first second after stimulus onset while failing
to account for significantly delayed neural responses or neural responses of longer
duration. This means that fMRI studies of emotion in large part fail to capture the
development of emotional experience beyond the initial response to the emotional
stimulus. I present several recent studies that have used time-varying HRFs and other
time-varying fMRI techniques to show why estimating temporal features of the BOLD
response may prove critical to understanding emotional dynamics. In one study, we used
the summation of three inverse-logit curves as a time-varying HRF (Lindquist & Wager,
2007) to examine how the duration of BOLD activity relates to self-reported intensity of
emotional experience (Waugh, Hamilton, & Gotlib, 2010). We found that separable
regions within the mPFC responded to intense negative images with either heightened
magnitude of activation or extended duration of activation. In another study, using
change-point analysis (Lindquist, Waugh, & Wager, 2007), we found that the mPFC
exhibited extended duration of activity during a long-epoch stress paradigm. In another
study, we found that this mPFC activation during a stressor differentiated those
diagnosed with major depressive disorder from those diagnosed with social anxiety
disorder. In sum, these studies show that assessing temporal dynamics of emotional
processes in the brain aid in our understanding of both normal and pathological
emotional dynamics. These studies also demonstrate that the mPFC is a key region that
may be involved in both the initial generation and continued maintenance of emotional
episodes. Future studies will need to better specify the precise psychological mechanisms
that contribute to the temporal dynamics of emotions and the specific role that the mPFC
plays in those mechanisms.
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF UNCONSCIOUS THOUGHT IN DECISION MAKING
J. David Creswell, Carnegie Mellon University; James K. Bursley, Carnegie Mellon University;
Ajay B. Satpute, Northeastern University - Unconscious processes have been shown to
facilitate many higher-level human behaviors. For example, brief periods of unconscious
thought have been shown to improve a decision when that decision is complex (e.g.,
choosing a car to purchase from a set of cars with various positive and negative
characteristics). In this talk, I will describe neuroimaging and behavioral studies
conducted in my lab that reveal a neurobehavioral explanation for these puzzling effects.
Specifically, we find that neural regions that support the encoding of decision information
continue to remain active during an unconscious thought period (while participants are
asked to complete a difficult distractor task), an effect we refer to as unconscious neural
reactivation. Moreover, this unconscious neural reactivation was predictive of improved
subsequent decision making performance after unconscious thought. Two follow-up
behavioral studies test and extend this unconscious neural reactivation hypothesis in
decision making. Conclusions will focus on the role of unconscious processing in learning,
decision making, and insight.
LANGUAGE SHAPES EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE Ajay B. Satpute, Northeastern
University; Jochen Weber, Columbia University; Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia University Emotions are often considered to be continuous, free-flowing experiences. But, our ability
to describe them using language requires that we place emotions into discrete linguistic
categories, or words. Hence, situations can arise in which the emotional experiences we
have are on the boundary between categories. These boundary cases would produce
increased conflict between experience and available categories, and resolving this conflict
would require that boundary items be forcibly grouped into one category or the other.
Such resolution could be trivial if boundary experiences are arbitrarily assigned to a
category, and doing so has little to no effect on how these items are experienced.
Alternatively, conflict resolution may rely on cognitive control processes, which,
according to biased-competition models, may alter the experience of the event to be more
category-consistent. To address these hypotheses, participants completed a novel
neuroimaging paradigm in which they were presented with stimuli that varied in
affective intensity, and either categorized or made continuous ratings of their emotional
responses to these images. Results showed that categorizing experiences on the boundary
elicited activity in prefrontal and cingulate cortex regions commonly involved in conflict
and cognitive control. But how is this conflict resolved? We examined affect-sensitive

	  

18	  

portions of the insula, and found that in this region, boundary items that were described
as more negative resulted in greater activity whereas items that were described as less
negative resulted in reduced activity, relative to the same stimuli had they not been
categorized. These results support the conclusion that requirements to categorize emotion,
as necessitated by language, may shape the way emotions are experienced.
SELF-CONTROL NETWORK PLASTICITY INDUCED BY A THREE-WEEK
RESPONSE INHIBITION TRAINING Elliot T. Berkman, University of Oregon; Junaid S.
Merchant, University of Oregon; Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA; Lauren E. Kahn, University of
Oregon - The dominant theory of self-control from social psychology, the Strength Model,
predicts that self-control will be amenable to change through training. Although some
behavioral data exists to support this idea, no parallel studies have been conducted in the
cognitive neurosciences to establish the underlying pathways through which these
behavioral improvements are made. We conducted a longitudinal training study to
investigate which neural systems, if any, show plasticity concomitant with changes in
behavioral improvements in self-control. Thirty-eight participants were randomly
assigned to receive self-control training (via a modified stop-signal task) or a control
training that did not involve self-control. Participants in both groups came to the lab for
ten sessions and engaged in a brief computerized task at each, but only participants in the
self-control training condition engaged in response inhibition as part of this task. Taskrelated brain activation during behavioral self-control (i.e., stop-signal task) and affective
self-control (i.e., emotional reappraisal) was measured in all participants before and after
the training. A whole brain interrogation of the group (training/control) by time (pretraining/post-training) interaction found greater changes in activation across time in the
training group (compared to the control group) in both tasks in a self-control and
attention regulation network including inferior frontal gyrus, dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, and inferior parietal cortex. Within the training group, increases in activation from
pre- to post-training in the inferior frontal gyrus were correlated with increases in
performance on the stop-signal task. These results support the Strength Model of selfcontrol, and elucidate the neural pathways by which training can lead to improvements in
several forms of self-control.

Debate

Keynote Debate: Valuation and Emotion
Saturday, April 21, 2012
6:00 – 7:15 PM
Antonio Rangel, California Institute of Technology
Elizabeth Phelps, New York University

F O R M A T and C O N T E N T
Each keynote debate will begin with a 20 minute presentation by each speaker
followed by 5 minutes for each speaker to offer a rebuttal and questions from the
audience. This keynote debate will focus on what neuroscience data can tell us about the
relationship between valuation, as studied in neuroeconomics, and emotion, as studied in
social, cognitive and affective neuroscience. Antonio Rangel will speak first, presenting
the view from neuroeconomic research on choice and decision-making. Elizabeth Phelps
will speak second, offering an alternative view from neuroscience research on affective
learning and emotion perception, experience and regulation.

	  

19	  

Poster Sessions
Session D

Empathy, Culture, Social Interaction & Health
Friday, April 20, 2012
2:45 - 4:15 PM

Session G

Person Perception, Development & Self-Control
Saturday, April 21, 2012
10:30 – 12:00 PM

Session I

Empathy & Choice
Friday, April 20, 2012
4:15 – 5:30 PM

SAN Poster Prize
We are pleased to commend a selection of posters as having scored among the top 5% for their
submission category (as judged by the selection committee). We have designated these posters as
receiving a SAN poster prize.
SAN poster prize recipients will be designated throughout the program with a
number.

	  

20	  

★ next to their poster

Poster Session D

and anxiety disorders have been linked to a number of
biological mechanisms, including variations in the
serotonin transporter gene, and decreased functional
connectivity between amygdala and regulatory prefrontal
cortex regions (Pezawas et al., 2005). Most of this work,
however, focuses mainly on outcomes in Western,
individualistic contexts, and treats heightened emotional
sensitivity as maladaptive. One theory holds that living
according to collectivistic norms requires particular
sensitivity to negative information in one’s surroundings,
due to increased emphasis on group membership and
hierarchy (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2010). Here we examine the
interrelationship
between
cultural
values
of
individualism-collectivism,
amygdala
response
to
negative emotional stimuli, and social cognitive abilities.
Bicultural Asian Americans completed an individualistic
or collectivistic essay prime, and subsequently matched a
series of emotional scenes and geometric shapes (control)
during fMRI scanning.
After scanning, participants
played a prisoner’s dilemma game, and completed a
theory of mind task (Reading the Mind in the Eyes; BaronCohen, 1997). ROI analysis within bilateral amygdala
revealed that participants’ degree of primed collectivism
positively predicts percent signal change in response to
emotional scenes. Greater amygdala response predicted
both increased cooperation in the prisoner’s dilemma
game, and better theory of mind ability; however, scores
on social cognitive tasks were unrelated to primed levels
of collectivism.
These findings demonstrate that
temporarily heightening awareness of collectivistic
cultural values enhances emotional vigilance, whereas
social-cognitive advantages more likely relate to more
chronic levels of emotional vigilance. The results provide
new hypotheses about the role of emotional sensitivity in
collectivistic contexts.
⁮ ⁮
D-03
NEURAL RESPONSES TO EMOTIONAL STIMULI
ARE MODULATED DIFFERENTLY BY CULTURALLY
SIMILAR AND DISSIMILAR OTHERS Kate A.
Woodcock, University of Peking University of Birmingham;
Dian Yu, University of Peking; Yi Liu, University of Peking;
Shihui Han, University of Peking - One important aspect of
individual differences in emotional responding is how
different individuals control their emotions in different
ways. There has been much interest in the neural
correlates of specific strategies for emotion regulation
(how people control their emotional experience and
expression) and internal factors (e.g. personality, mental
health symptomatology) associated with individual
differences in these strategies. However, how social
context can impact on emotional responding and its
regulation, remains poorly understood.
This study
investigated whether and how the presence of a researcher
perceived by participants as pertaining to a more similar
or more different cultural background, influenced
emotional responding. We recorded participants’ event

★

D-01
5-HTTLPR POLYMORPHISM INFLUENCES THE
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN A CULTURAL VALUE
AND BRAIN ACTIVITY UNDERLYING SOCIAL
COGNITION Yina Ma Bingfeng Li, Chenbo Wang, Zhenhao
Shi, Yun Sun, Feng Sheng, Yifan Zhang, Wenxia Zhang, Yi
Rao, Shihui Han; Peking University - Thinking about the self
and others consists of a key component of social cognition
that guides social behaviors. Recent research has shown
that sociocultural experiences influence the brain activity
underlying social cognition (e.g., the processing of the self
and others). What remains unknown is whether and how
biological factors interact with sociocultural experiences to
affect the brain activity involved in social cognition. We
investigated whether the serotonin transporter gene
promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) affects the
association between cultural values and brain activity
associated with the processing of the self and a significant
other. Using functional MRI, we scanned adults with
short/short (s/s) or long/long (l/l) alleles of 5-HTTLPR
during judgments of social, mental, and physical
attributes of themselves and a close other (i.e. mother). We
first found that a measure of a specific cultural value
related to self-construals was correlated with the neural
activity associated with judgments on the self and mother
in brain regions such as the medial and lateral frontal
cortex, temporoparietal junction, superior parietal cortex,
insula, hippocampus, and cerebelum. Moreover, the
association between the cultural value and brain activity
related to mental attribute judgments was moderated by
5-HTTLPR, being stronger in l/l carriers than in s/s
carriers. In sum, our functional neuroimaging results
showed evidence for a gene–culture interaction in shaping
the association between a cultural value (i.e.,
interdependence in self-construal) and brain activity
related to the processing of the self and a close other.
While there has been considerable evidence for cultural
influences on human activity underlying multiple
cognitive processes (Han and Northoff, 2008), the current
study raised the question of whether and how cultural
effects on brain activity are constrained by an individual’s
genetic makeup.
D-02
NEGATIVE
EMOTION
IN
COLLECTIVISTIC
CONTEXTS: THE EFFECTS OF INDIVIDUALISMCOLLECTIVISM ON AMYGDALA FUNCTION AND
SOCIAL COGNITION Lisa A. Hechtman, Northwestern
University; Ahmad Hariri, Duke University; Tokiko Harada,
Nagoya University; Yoko Mano, Tohoku University; Norihiro
Sadato, National Institute for Physiological Sciences; Todd B.
Parrish, Northwestern University; Tetsuya Iidaka, Nagoya
University; Joan Y. Chiao, Northwestern University - Mood

	  

21	  

related potentials (ERPs) and self-report ratings of arousal
and emotion regulation from Chinese female adults,
whilst they observed positive, negative or neutral
photographs in the presence of a Chinese or British
researcher, or whilst alone. Participants’ cultural values
were measured using self-report questionnaires. We
found that ERP responses to positive stimuli at 120-180ms
post photograph onset, over a frontal region, were
significantly down-modulated in the presence of the
British researcher and this down-modulation was
significantly associated with self-reports of increased
emotion regulation. Early ERP responses to negative
emotional stimuli were modulated in different directions
in the presence of the British (downwards) versus the
Chinese (upwards) researcher. Increased differentiation
between the degrees (positive emotion) and directions
(negative emotion) of modulation of early neural
responses to emotional stimuli, in the presence the British
versus the Chinese researcher, were associated with
decreased interdependent self construal.
Possible
differences between the emotion regulation triggered by
researchers perceived by participants as pertaining to a
more similar versus more different cultural background
will be discussed. The association between increased
interdependence and decreased differentiation between
the two contexts in terms of emotional responding will be
discussed with respect to contemporary theories of self
construal.

presented with neutral and unpleasant pictures in random
order under two different instruction conditions. First, in
the attend condition, they were instructed to pay attention
to the picture and the emotional responses that were
naturally elicited by the pictures. Second, in the suppress
condition, they were asked to minimize and hide their
emotional responses that were naturally elicited by the
picture. Our predictions were that the amplitude of the
LPP would be decreased during instruction to suppress
emotional responses compared to the attend instruction
and that Asians would show a greater LPP reduction
during emotional suppression than European Americans.
We first analyzed the mean amplitude of the LPP between
400 and 700 ms post-stimulus and found that the LPP was
significantly greater for the unpleasant pictures than for
the neutral pictures. There were no effects of culture and
instruction in this time window. However, when we
analyzed the LPP mean amplitude between 1500 and 3500
ms, Asians showed a significant decrease under the
suppress condition compared to the attend condition. In
contrast, European Americans did not show such LPP
reduction in the suppress condition (vs. attend condition).
Post-experimental questionnaires of task engagement and
task difficulty revealed that both cultural groups were
equally engaged and worked hard. These results suggest
that both European Americans and Asians strongly
experienced negative emotion shortly after being exposed
to the emotional stimuli, however, in less than two
seconds, Asians succeeded in suppressing their emotional
responses, whereas European Americans failed. The
failure of European Americans to decrease the LPP was
unlikely to be an artifact caused by lack of motivation. Our
findings provide strong evidence that neural mechanisms
of emotion regulation are shaped by culture.

★

D-04
CULTURE
MODULATES
ELECTROCORTICAL
RESPONSES DURING EMOTION SUPPRESSION:
ASIANS ARE BETTER SUPPRESSERS Asuka Murata,
University of Michigan; Jason S. Moser, Michigan State
University; Shinobu Kitayama, University of Michigan Emotion regulation is an important concept in personality
and social psychology. To achieve goal-directed outcomes,
we manage and modify our emotional experience and
expressions. Growing literatures have demonstrated the
interpersonal functions of emotion regulation. As one of
the major functions of culture is to maintain social order,
cultures create rules, guidelines, and norms regarding
emotion regulation. Previous behavioral studies have
indicated that Asians habitually suppress their emotional
responses more than European Americans do. This
cultural difference may come from Eastern cultural values,
which consider low arousal emotions as more desirable
and emphasize self-control relatively more than Western
cultures. Yet, little is known about the underlying neural
mechanisms that support such differences between Asians
and European Americans in emotion suppression. Here
we examined the effects of suppression instruction on the
centro-parietally distributed LPP (late positive potential),
an event-related brain potential that is thought to reflect
arousal level to emotional stimuli. The LPP, which is
elicited by emotional stimuli, peaks around 500 ms and
lasted for the duration of the stimuli.
Seventeen
European Americans and seventeen Asians were

	  

D-05
CULTURAL
VALUES
OF
INDIVIDUALISMCOLLECTIVISM
MODULATE
PREFRONTAL
RESPONSE DURING RESPONSE INHIBITION Narun
Pornpattananangkul, Northwestern University ; Ahmad Hariri,
Duke University; Tokiko Harada4, Yoko Mano, Northwestern
University; Hidetsugu Komeda, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences; Todd Parrish, Northwestern University;
Norihiro Sadato, National Institute for Physiological Sciences;
Tetsuya Iidaka, Nagoya University; Joan Chiao, Northwestern
University - Those who value collectivism, or collectivists,
focus their interest on interdependence and harmony of
people in their group. On the other hand, those who value
individualism, or individualists, emphasize more on
independence and self-reliance of each individual. Being
interdependent with their group, collectivists would be
more likely than individualists to inhibit their personal
goals in order to meet their group’s aims. However, very
little is known about how this cultural tendency shapes
neural mechanisms underlying this response inhibition. In
the present study, cross-cultural functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) was conducted with three
populations: Caucasian Americans in the US, Japanese in
Japan, and Japanese in the US. After completing a survey

22	  

on individualism-collectivism values, the participants then
performed a Go-No Go task in the fMRI scanner. Our
results show that collectivists exhibit greater lateral and
medial prefrontal response during response inhibition
compared to individualists, irrespective of nationality or
geographic region. Taken together, this is a novel evidence
showing that inhibitory-related neuronal activity varies as
a function of cultural values.

relationships (Z>2.3, p<0.05, corrected). Political ideology
was significantly negatively related to iFC between the
right dACC and a cluster spanning the right insula and
putamen. Greater liberalism was associated with
increased, while greater conservatism was associated with
decreased iFC between these regions. Post-hoc analyses
showed that iFC between these regions was also
negatively correlated with system justification scores.
Greater system justification was associated with decreased
iFC (r=-0.42, p<0.05).
Our results demonstrate a
relationship between the intrinsic functional organization
of the brain and political ideology. Greater liberalism was
associated with increased iFC among regions in the
salience network, while greater conservatism was
associated with decreased iFC. This provides the first
evidence that political ideology is related, not only to taskevoked responses in the dACC itself, but to the intrinsic
communication among regions within a broader
functional network. More generally, these results are
consistent with the idea that political ideology manifests
in observable differences in the functional architecture of
the human brain.

D-06
POLITICAL IDEOLOGY IS RELATED TO THE
INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF THE
HUMAN BRAIN Christine L. Cox, New York University;
John T. Jost, New York University; F. Xavier Castellanos, New
York University, Nathan Kline Institute; Michael P. Milham,
Nathan Kline Institute, Child Mind Institute; Clare Kelly, New
York University; Jay J. Van Bavel, New York University Political ideology (i.e., liberalism/conservatism) has long
been thought to arise from differences in beliefs about
human nature and personal experiences. However, recent
research suggests that individual differences in political
ideology are associated with more basic cognitive and
motivational orientations toward the world (e.g., Oxley et
al., 2008). In the current research, we examined whether
individual differences in political ideology would be
associated with the intrinsic functional architecture of the
brain. Previous research has shown that political ideology
is associated with both the structure and function of the
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC). Liberalism is
associated with increased gray matter (Kanai et al., 2011)
and increased conflict-related processing in dACC,
hypothesized to underlie liberals’ greater responsiveness
to complex information (Amodio et al., 2007). Consistent
with this interpretation, the dACC is part of a network of
regions, including the insula and striatum, that process
emotionally significant stimuli (Seeley et al., 2007).
Regions within this “salience network” also exhibit
correlated intrinsic (task-independent) low-frequency
fluctuations in the resting-state fMRI (R-fMRI) signal,
quantified using intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC)
methods. Therefore, we investigated the relationship
between the iFC of the dACC and individual differences
in self-reported political ideology. Several recent studies
have related individual differences in the strength of iFC
between specific brain regions to stable personality
variables (e.g., Cox et al., 2010). Twenty-one adults (mean
age=29.6 yrs; 18 male) completed a 6-minute R-fMRI scan
and a self-report questionnaire assessing political ideology
(i.e., how liberal or conservative) and system justification,
the tendency to believe that existing social and economic
institutions and arrangements are fair and legitimate (Kay
& Jost, 2003). Standard preprocessing was implemented
using FSL and AFNI. The residual timeseries from 4mm
spherical regions of interest (left and right dACC) was
then extracted for each individual and correlated with
every other voxel in the brain. Political ideology scores
were entered as a covariate of interest in group-level
analyses (with age and sex as nuisance covariates),
producing maps of significant political orientation/iFC

	  

★

D-07
THE COST OF COMPARISON: ACHIEVEMENT
GOALS, GENDER, AND REBOUND FROM FAILURES
IN MATH Jennifer Mangels, Baruch College, City University
of New York; Laura Deering, Baruch College, City University of
New York; Catherine Good, Baruch College, City University of
New York - Achievement in STEM disciplines is not
determined by ability alone, but also by social and
motivational factors. Recently, there has been considerable
focus on the role stereotypes play in handicapping
females’ ability to optimally utilize cognitive resources for
math problem solving. Although environments that
neutralize stereotype threat should theoretically eliminate
gender differences, if females internalize achievement
goals that emphasize comparison of one’s ability to others
(normative goals), they may still experience differentially
poor outcomes when cues in the environment suggest that
their ability is lacking. In particular, normative goals may
simulate the effects of stereotype threat by enhancing
arousal and attention to failure cues (e.g., negative
feedback) that then interfere with the more adaptive
cognitive responses that could promote effective rebound
from failure (see Mangels et al. [2011]). In contrast,
achievement goals focusing on challenge and mastery are
likely to be associated with persistence and rebound after
failure, regardless of gender. In the present study, males
and females who primarily identified with either
normative (N-bias) or challenge goals (C-bias) participated
in a difficult test-feedback-retest math paradigm under
non-threat framing. N-biased students, regardless of
gender, were impaired compared to C-biased students in
their ability to utilize instructive feedback to correct errors
on the subsequent surprise retest. To better understand
how later error correction was related to the initial
response to failure, we focused our analysis on event-

23	  

related potentials (ERPs) to negative accuracy feedback
following first-test errors (using the response to positive
feedback as a baseline) and the quantity and quality of
participants’ engagement with a subsequent computerized
math tutor. With regard to the ERPs, both early/fast
(feedback related negativity [FRN], frontal P3a) and
later/sustained (late positive potential [LPP]) indices of
motivated attention were evaluated. Females exhibited a
more negative-going FRN, regardless of goals. Yet, Cbiased males exhibited an enhanced P3 relative to Cbiased females. The LPP did not demonstrate any overall
effects of gender or goals. There also were no gender or
goal differences in the quantity of tutor use, however
females and C-biased students self-reported the tutor as
more helpful overall. We then turned to structural
equation modeling to examine whether goals and gender
influenced the extent to which any differential responses
to negative feedback and tutor engagement predicted
correction of errors on the retest. For females, it was
normative goals that best predicted enhanced orienting to
negative feedback (P3a), reduced the quality of tutor
engagement, and led to poorer outcomes on the retest. In
contrast, for males, challenge goals were the strongest
predictor of better outcomes on the retest, of more
adaptive responses to negative feedback (reduced LPP),
and of greater quantity and quality of tutor use. These
findings illustrate the costs of emphasizing normative
comparison over mastery in both males and females
undertaking challenging math tasks. Additionally, they
show that for females, this cost is linked directly to
normative goals that simulate the effects of stereotype
threat, whereas for males these costs reflect the lack of
benefit from approaching math from a perspective of
challenge.

youths with disruptive behavior disorders and
psychopathic traits show reduced amygdala responses to
fearful expressions. Whether impaired responding to
distress cues extends to pain cues is currently unknown,
but elevated antisocial behavior in psychopathy suggests
potential disruptions in processing others’ pain. We used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
investigate neural responses to increasing pain intensity
perceived as occurring to the self or others in healthy
adolescents and adolescents with psychopathic traits.
Fourteen adolescents with Oppositional Defiant Disorder
or Conduct Disorder and psychopathic traits and 21
control subjects were scanned as they viewed photographs
of hands and feet in being injured (e.g., being crushed or
burned) or in neutral contexts. In each trial, adolescents
were either instructed to imagine that the limbs were their
own or that they belonged to another person. Regressors
were weighted according to the intensity of the perceived
pain. Behavioral and fMRI data were analyzed using
random-effects analysis of variance. Youths with
psychopathic traits showed less of an increase in activity,
relative to healthy youths, within rostral anterior cingulate
cortex and ventral striatum (putamen) as the depicted
pain increased. Within the amygdala, this reduction in
activity particularly occurred when the pain was
perceived as occurring to another. Responsiveness within
both amygdala and rostral anterior cingulate cortex as a
function of apparent pain to another was negatively
correlated with the severity of psychopathic traits. These
results indicate that youths with psychopathic traits show
less sensitivity in regions implicated in the affective
response to another’s pain as the perceived intensity of
this pain increases. Moreover, this insensitivity appears to
predict symptom severity. Given suggestions that the
pain of others may trigger empathic distress in the
observer, providing a basis for moral development, we
conclude that dysfunction in response to others’ pain may
contribute to the behavioral deficits observed in this
population.

★

D-08
NOT FEELING YOUR PAIN: NEURAL RESPONSES
TO PAIN IN SELF AND OTHERS IN YOUTHS WITH
PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS Abigail A. Marsh, National
Institute of Mental Health , Georgetown University; Elizabeth
C. Finger, University of Western Ontario; Katherine A. Fowler,
National Institute of Mental Health; Christopher J. Adalio,
National Institute of Mental Health; Ilana T.N. Jurkowitz,
National Institute of Mental Health; Julia C. Schechter,
National Institute of Mental Health; Daniel S. Pine, National
Institute of Mental Health; Jean Decety, Ph.D., Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; R. J. R. Blair, National
Institute of Mental Health - Psychopathic traits, including
reduced empathy and guilt, affect a subgroup of youths
with the disruptive behavior disorders Conduct Disorder
and Oppositional Defiant Disorder. These traits are
detectable early in childhood, persist into adulthood, and
heighten youths’ risk for recurrent antisocial acts and
future criminal behaviors. In line with the clinical
presentation of reduced empathy, individuals with
psychopathic traits are impaired in recognizing distressrelated cues like fearful and sad facial expressions that
normally inhibit interpersonal aggression. Moreover,

	  

D-09
RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN THE TIME-COURSE OF
PAIN PERCEPTION PREDICT BIASES IN HELPING
BEHAVIOR Stephanie Echols, University of Chicago; Jean
Decety, University of Chicago - Individuals are more likely
to feel concern for- and help in-group members in pain
than out-group members (i.e., Hein, et al., 2010). This
investigation explored whether the time-course of pain
perception differs for racial in- and out-group members,
and whether this difference predicts in-group biases in
helping behavior. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were
recorded while Caucasian participants viewed images of
Caucasian and African-American men expressing either
pain or no emotion. Participants indicated via key-press
what expression was displayed. Upon completion of this
task, participants received $5 for correctly identifying the
emotion in the images. Next, participants watched short
video clips of men in pain, and were given the
opportunity to help by donating a portion of the $5 they

24	  

earned to help pay the cost of each individuals’ medical
bill. Results showed that both early and late ERP
components of pain processing were moderated by the
race of the target. Participants exhibited more negative
occipital N170s for in-group pain compared to in-group
neutral (t (18) = -2.8, p < .05) and out-group pain
expressions (t (18) = -2.3, p < .05). N170 deflections to outgroup pain did not differ from neutral expressions (t < 1).
Similarly, frontal P200 deflections were greater to ingroup pain than neutral expressions (t (18) = 2.9, p < .05),
and marginally greater than out-group pain (t (18) = 1.8, p
< .09). No P200 differences were observed for out-group
pain vs. neutral expressions (t < 1). Participants also
exhibited enhanced P300 to in-group pain than neutral
expressions (t (18) = 2.1, p < .05), whereas no expression
differences emerged for out-group members (t < 1).
Notably, ERP components differentially predicted helping
behavior for in- and out-group members. Enhanced N170
deflections to in-group members predicted in-group
helping ( r’s > 0.45, p < .05), whereas reduced N100
deflections to out-group neutral expressions predicted
out-group helping (r = 0.6, p < .05). Results are discussed
in terms of automatic and controlled components of pain
perception and how they may be related to helping
behavior. This investigation sheds light on the cognitive
processes that underlie pain perception for in- and outgroup faces, and contributes to our understanding of
group biases in empathic concern and helping behavior.

D-11
EMPATHIC CONCERN, POWER, AND P2 RESPONSE
TO OTHERS’ EXPRESSIONS OF PAIN Michael E. W.
Varnum, Peking University; Zhenhao Shi, Peking University;
Shihui Han, Peking University - In an exploratory study, we
investigated the relationship between a self-report
measure of trait empathy (Empathic Concern), power, and
brain responses to others’ suffering. Previous research
suggests that power is negatively related to sensitivity to
others’ distress. People with low SES and those primed to
feel low in SES show greater accuracy in determining
others’ emotional states (Kraus, et al., 2010) and engage in
more prosocial behavior (Piff, et al., 2010). In the present
study we used an ERP paradigm to investigate whether
power affected people’s responses to images of others in
pain, focusing on an early attentional component (P2) that
has previously been shown to increase in response to faces
expressing pain (Feng, et al., under review). Based on
previous research, we suspected that inducing subjects to
feel a low sense of power would heighten P2 in response
to painful (as opposed to neutral) faces. We employed a
3(Power: High, Low, Neutral) x 2(Facial Expression:
Painful vs. Neutral) within-subjects design. Although we
did not observe the predicted 3 x 2 interaction, exploratory
analyses revealed that Low Power did increase P2
response to painful vs. neutral faces among participants
who were low in Empathic Concern (EC). Further, we
observed significant 2 (EC) x 3 (Power) x 2 (Face)
interactions at four frontal electrodes. Including only the
High Power and Low Power conditions, 3-way
interactions were observed at 13 frontal electrodes. This
study suggests that low power may indeed increase
sensitivity to others’ pain (as indexed by P2), but that this
effect seems to be confined to people who are low in trait
empathy. Our results also suggest that among those high
in EC, a ceiling effect may be present. We are seeking to
replicate this finding, pre-selecting participants based on
extremity of EC scores. We also hope to explore whether
individual differences in trait-level empathy might also be
related to more general differences in attention to and
encoding of emotional and social information about
others.

D-10
HOW EMOTIONAL STATE AFFECTS EMPATHY FOR
PAIN—AN ERP STUDY Rui Sun - Social and developmental psychology research have found that individuals’
emotion can affect empathy. However, different research
have reached different conclusions, and few research have
directly explored the relationship between the two using
neuroimaging methods. The current study used the high
time-resolution event-related potentials (ERPs), and used
movie clips to prime subjects into happy, neutral and sad
emotions aimed at directly studying the relationship
between emotion and empathy. Subjects were instructed
to judge the expressions they saw to be painful or neutral.
Results showed that during 80-110ms, in happy emotion,
painful faces triggered a larger N1 compared to neutral
faces, while there’s no difference between painful and
neutral faces in neutral and sad emotions. During 300400ms, in happy emotion, the difference between painful
and neutral emotions decreased but in sad and neutral
emotions, there were still difference between two
expressions. The results proved our previous early and
late model of empathy for pain, suggesting that emotional
states can dynamically affect empathy for pain in both
early automatic emotion sharing stage and late cognitive
appraisal stage. It also indicated that happy emotion
would increase the ability to detect painful expression in
the early stage but would decrease empathy for pain in
the late cognitive appraisal stage; sad emotion could not
increase the detection of painful expression in the early
stage but would last longer in the late stage.

	  

D-12
EFFECT OF THE BENZODIAZEPINE AGONIST
OXAZEPAM ON PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL AND
SELF-REPORTED INDICES OF EMPATHY
Gustav
Nilsonne, Sandra Tamm, Armita Golkar, Andreas Olsson,
Martin Ingvar, and Predrag Petrovic; Karolinska Institutet Perpetrators of violent crimes sometimes self-medicate
with benzodiazepines in order to release inhibitions
against violent behavior, according to case series reports
from forensic psychiatry.
Aims: We investigated the
effect of the benzodiazepine Oxazepam on self-reported
and psychophysiological measures of empathy. 66 healthy
male experimental subjects were randomized to 25 mg
oral Oxazepam or placebo, in a double-blind design.
Subjects were introduced to an assistant who pretended to
also be an experimental subject. Before the experiment,

25	  

subjects completed questionnaires for dispositional
empathy (Interpersonal Reactivity Index), alexithymia
(Toronto Alexithymia Scale-20), and anxiety (State-Trait
Anxiety Inventory), as well as pain titration using a skin
electrode to find pain thresholds of VAS 10 (perceptible
stimulus, but not actually painful) and VAS 80 (worst
tolerable pain). Subjects were seated next to the assistant
but with a screen between them, so that only the hands
with electrodes were visible to the other. The experimental
paradigm consisted of alternating electrical shocks to the
subject and to the assistant, although the latter only
pretended to receive pain stimulation. Cues were given on
a computer screen in front of the subject and the assistant.
After each shock, the subject rated the intensity and
unpleasantness of the stimulation. Skin conductance was
measured using finger electrodes and Biopak recording
hardware. The Oxazepam group showed increased
reaction times in the psychomotor vigilance task,
reflecting the sedative effect of the drug (p=0.02). The
Oxazepam group also showed lowed self-reported anxiety
after the experiment compared to before the experiment,
using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, reflecting the
anxiolytic effect of the drug (p=0.01). Subjects were unable
to tell whether they had been given Oxazepam or placebo,
confirming the integrity of the blinding. Oxazepam did
not significantly decrease ratings of pain nor galvanic skin
responses to others’ pain. Self-rated unpleasantness to
others’ pain was significantly correlated to rated trait
empathy using the Interpersonal Reactivity Index. 25 mg
Oxazepam did not cause a significant decrease in empathy
for pain.

studies was used. These findings challenge the
assumption that the aTLs play a critical role in ToM: they
suggest that, as far as the left temporal pole is concerned,
despite its recurrent activation in neuroimaging studies,
this region is not necessary for inferring mental states.
Implications for the localization of social knowledge in the
brain will be discussed.
D-14
FUNCTIONAL
NEURAL
PLASTICITY
AND
ASSOCIATED CHANGES IN POSITIVE AFFECT
AFTER COMPASSION TRAINING Olga Klimecki, Max
Planck Institute, Leipzig; Susanne Leiberg, University of
Zurich; Claus Lamm, University of Vienna; Tania Singer, Max
Planck Institute, Leipzig - Compassion allows us to relate to
the suffering of others in a positive, prosocially-oriented
way. To study the functional neural plasticity of
compassion, we compared fMRI responses in a group of
female participants receiving short-term compassion
training to a control group undergoing memory training.
Before and after training, participants completed a newly
developed Socio-affective Video Task optimized for the
repeated measurement of empathy, positive and negative
affect in response to distress witnessed in others.
Compassion training compared to memory training
increased neural activity in medial orbitofrontal cortex
along with putamen, pallidum and ventral tegmental area
– key regions involved in the experience of positive social
affect. Compassion, but not memory training, also
augmented the subjective experience of empathy and
positive affect even when exposed to distressing stimuli.
These findings suggest that cultivating compassion offers
a new coping strategy that fosters resilience and allows
individuals to respond to distressing situations with
other-oriented positive affect.

D-13
THE LEFT TEMPORAL POLE IS NOT NECESSARY
FOR THEORY OF MIND
Caroline Michel, Catholic
University of Louvain; Agnesa Pillon, Catholic University of
Louvain; Adrian Ivanoiu, Catholic University of Louvain;
Renaud Lhommel, Catholic University of Louvain; Dana
Samson, Catholic University of Louvain - Neuroimaging
studies have shown that the anterior temporal lobes
(aTLs) are part of the neural network consistently
activated when people are engaged in Theory of Mind
(ToM) tasks, i.e., tasks requiring to reason about other
people’s mental states. These findings have led some
researchers to conclude that the aTLs play a critical role in
our mentalizing ability, by either subtending the social
scripts (Gallagher & Frith, 2003) or the social concepts that
we need to infer other people’s mental states (e.g., Ross &
Olson, 2010). Here, we report the case of a patient, C.M.,
who suffers from semantic dementia following a brain
degeneration affecting mainly the left aTL. The patient
showed a severe impairment in tasks probing his semantic
knowledge about the world, including social semantic
knowledge tested in a series of tasks contrasting social and
non-social concepts. However, despite his lesion, C.M.
was perfectly able to infer other people’s mental states in
non-verbal tasks, including other people’s intentions,
knowledge and beliefs, even when material that has been
shown to activate the left temporal pole in neuroimaging

	  

D-15
MORAL
VALUES
ARE
ASSOCIATED
WITH
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN REGIONAL BRAIN
VOLUME Gary J Lewis, University of California, Santa
Barbara; Ryota Kanai, UCL; Timothy C Bates, University of
Edinburgh; Geraint Rees, UCL - Moral sentiment has been
hypothesized to reflect evolved adaptations to social
living. If so, individual differences in moral values may
relate to regional variation in brain structure. We tested
this hypothesis in a sample of 70 young, healthy adults
examining whether differences on two major dimensions
of moral values were significantly associated with regional
gray matter volume. The two clusters of moral values
assessed were “individualizing” (values of harm/care and
fairness), and “binding” (deference to authority, in-group
loyalty, and purity/sanctity). Candidate regions were
those previously linked to empathy, mentalizing, and
disgust processing. Individualizing was positively
associated with dorsomedial prefrontal cortex volume,
and negatively associated with precuneus volume. For
binding, significant positive associations were found for
bilateral subcallosal gyrus and left anterior insula
volumes. These findings demonstrate that variation in

26	  

moral sentiment reflects individual differences in brain
structure and suggest a biological basis for moral
sentiment, distributed across multiple brain regions.

Janek S. Lobmaier, University of Bern; Martin H. Fischer,
University of Potsdam - The facial feedback hypothesis
states that activation of facial muscles can influence
emotional experience. For example, an individual who is
forced to smile during a social event will actually find the
event more enjoyable. Here we investigate to which extent
activation of certain facial muscles influences the
interpretation of other people’s emotional expressions.
Fifty-nine participants observed self-paced morphsequences either showing a happy or sad face turning to a
neutral expression, or a neutral face turning to a face
expressing happiness or sadness. The task was to report
the frame where the initial expression changed to another
expression. In counterbalanced blocks, participants held a
pen either between their teeth (activation the zygomaticus
muscle as if the participant was smiling), or between their
lips (activating the corrugator supercilii muscles, as if
frowning; cf. Strack, Martin, & Stepper, 1988). In a control
block no pen was used. Repeated measures ANOVA
analyzed the frame number at which the change was
detected with the factors morph sequence (happy-neutral,
sad-neutral, neutral-happy, neutral-sad) and pen
condition (teeth, lips, no pen). We found a significant
main effect of morph sequence and of pen condition, and
the interaction between morph sequence and pen
condition was also significant. Specifically, a happy
expression was perceived to persist longer and sadness
was perceived to fade sooner if participants were forced to
smile (by holding the pen between the teeth) compared to
when the pen was held between the lips. These results are
discussed in the light of the facial feedback hypothesis and
the possible involvement of mirror neurons when
interpreting other people’s emotional expressions.

D-16
FACE-TO-FACE
FMRI:
INVESTIGATING
THE
NEURAL RESPONSE TO LIVE SOCIAL GAZE Laura A.
Loesch, J. Michael Tyszka, Jed T. Elison, Ralph Adolphs;
California Institute of Technology - Gaze is an important
social communicative cue in primates, used to convey
information about emotion, mental states, and detected
changes in the environment. The networks involved in
gaze perception have been studied extensively in humans
and non-human primates; disturbances in gaze processing
have been investigated in individuals who exhibit deficits
in social interaction, namely individuals with autism or
amygdala damage. While existing studies have made
much progress in understanding how gaze cues are
processed, social neuroscience has yet to benefit from a
clearer understanding of how the brain processes live
social gaze. In an effort to preserve experimental control,
experimental designs have traditionally favored prerecorded and carefully prepared visual stimuli rather than
more ecologically valid alternatives. While more
interactive, dynamic eyetracking-controlled stimuli are
beginning to be utilized, the fact remains that the neural
response to actual gaze is not well understood. Actual eyegaze feels qualitatively different from simulated gaze;
responses to static and recorded faces habituate rather
quickly, compared to the subsisting feeling elicited by
being stared at by another. Additionally, skin conductance
responses are greater for live than recorded gaze stimuli
(Hietanen, et. al, 2008). Our study investigates the neural
substrates underlying this heightened physiological and
experiential response to live gaze and attempts to
contribute to a cohesive view of social gaze processing in
the human brain. We contextualize social gaze as being
mediated by three cortical systems: (1) a gaze network that
includes the inferior parietal lobule, fusiform gyrus, and a
nonopponent multichannel system in the anterior superior
temporal sulcus (Calder, et al., 2007), which together
detect dynamic gaze shifts and gaze direction; (2) the right
posterior STS, modulated by the right anterior insula
(Ethofer, et al., 2011) and the amygdala serve to attach
social significance to gaze shifts; and (3) the temporal
parietal junction, anterior insula and a mentalizing system
(Spunt, et al., 2011) that includes the medial prefrontal
cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and temporal poles will
be differentially activated during joint gaze with a live
agent. Through a novel blocked-design fMRI experiment
that used real actors as stimuli, and therefore allowed the
social-interactive component of gaze to be present, we
examine the interaction of all of these systems and the
corresponding three components of social gaze: gaze detection, social significance, and mentalizing through gaze.

D-18
STRUCTURAL BRAIN IMAGING IN SUICIDE
BEHAVIOR AND DEPRESSION Jorge Mario RodríguezFernández, Columbia University; Christine DeLorenzo,
Columbia University; J. John Mann, Columbia University, New
York State Psychiatric Institute, Ramin V. Parsey, Columbia
University, New York State Psychiatric Institute - Suicidal
behavior is listed as one of the symptoms in the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) for a
depressive episode. Currently there is no consensus
regarding structural differences in the suicidal brain in
major depressive disorder (MDD), but some recent
findings have shown decreased volume in the prefrontal
cortex. Suicidal ideation in patients with co-morbidities
has been associated with decreased frontal volumes,
relative hypometabolism and reduced perfusion in the
prefrontal cortex. This evidence supports the idea of
limbic dysregulation and impaired impulse control in
MDD patients with suicidal behavior. In this work, we
investigated possible differences in MRI-derived cortical
thickness among suicidal versus non-suicidal depressed
patients and controls. 5 MDD patients with suicidal
behavior, 5 MDD patients with non-suicidal behavior and
5 controls received T1-weighted MRI scans. The
demographic data included age (mean=46±10.6, 41.2±4.1,

D-17
SMILE AND I SMILE WITH YOU:
FURTHER
EVIDENCE FOR THE FACIAL FEEDBACK THEORY

	  

27	  

and 42.2±2.4, respectively), sex (60%, 40%, 60%, male for
each group), handedness (100% right handed), and
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (mean= 31±4.18,
29.8±3.3, and 1.8±1.6 respectively). Participants were
scanned in a 3-T Signa Advantage system (GE
Healthcare). Final voxel size was 1.02 x 1.02 x 1.00 mm.
Using the freely available software package Freesurfer
(http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) with the standard
options, we computed cortical thickness measures of the
prefrontal cortex in each subject. A two-tailed unpaired ttest was used to compare mean regional cortical thickness
between groups. We did not find statistically significant
evidence of a difference in mean cortical thickness in the
subregions of the prefrontal cortex: orbitofrontal cortex,
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex
and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, across the three
groups. The present findings could be explained by the
small sample size, although these findings agree with the
absence of consensus in structural imaging in the
depressed patient with suicidal behavior. Future projects
will involve imaging a larger cohort of patients and voxel
based morphometry analysis. Finally, it is possible that, in
this cohort, MDD and suicidal behavior were not
associated with changes in gray matter.

sustained neural activities that are respectively associated
with trial-specific processes of death-relevance of stimuli
and continued death-related thoughts and suggest that the
combination of the transient and sustained neural
activities involved in death-related thought can predict
dispositional death anxiety.
D-20
SPONTANEOUS
BRAIN
ACTIVITY
AND
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AMONG PTSD
PATIENTS: A RESTING-STATE FMRI STUDY Xiaodan
Yan, NYU School of Medicine; Victoria Cressman, Manhattan
VA Medical Center; Mariana Lazar, NYU School of Medicine;
Adam Brown, NYU School of Medicine; Leslie Prichep, NYU
School of Medicine; Clare Henn-Haase, NYU School of
Medicine; Thomas Neylane, University of California, San
Francisco; Owen Wolkowitz, University of California, San
Francisco; Steven Hamilton, University of California, San
Francisco; Rachel Yehuda, Mount Sinai School of Medicine;
Daniel Sodickson, NYU School of Medicine; Michael Weiner,
VA Medical Center, San Francisco; Charles Marmar, NYU
School of Medicine - The goal is to examine the amplitudes
of spontaneous brain activity as well as functional
connectivity (FC) patterns associated with posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). Resting state fMRI (rs-fMRI) data
were obtained from 38 combat veterans, with 19
diagnosed as PTSD+ and 19 PTSD-, after comprehensive
behavioral and diagnostic assessments. A protocol was
adapted to analyze the amplitude of low frequency
fluctuation (ALFF) from rsfMRI, giving rise to group
difference statistical maps of ALFF values. Significant
clusters showing group differences were identified, from
which average pre-processed time series were extracted
for analyzing pairwise FC patterns. Compared to the
PTSD- group, the PTSD+ group showed significantly
decreased ALFF at the precuneus, dorsal middle
prefrontal cortex (dMPFC), posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC) etc, and increased ALFF at the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC), insula, and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC).
PTSD+ group also showed significant decrease in
thalamocortical functional connectivity. Regional ALFF
values demonstrated significant association with clinical
scores that represent re-experiencing symptoms,
depression symptoms, dissociative symptoms etc. The
neural networks derived from global FCs also showed
significant changes in graph properties and network
architecture. These findings indicate important changes in
spontaneous brain activity as well as intrinsic FCs
associated with PTSD, which might underlie the changes
of neural activity observed in task-based fMRI studies.
The multiple neural parameters showing PTSD-dependent
differences might have important diagnostic values, which
will be investigated further in future studies.

D-19
NEURAL
ACTIVITY
TO
DEATH-RELATED
THOUGHT AND DISPOSITIONAL DEATH ANXIETY
Zhenhao Shi, Shihui Han; Peking University - Objective:
Recent research has shown that perception of deathrelated vs. death-unrelated linguistic cues produced
increased frontoparietal activity but decreased insular
activity. The current study investigated (1) whether the
increased frontoparietal and decreased insular activities
are respectively associated with transient trial-specific
processes of linguistic cues of death and sustained deathrelated thought during death-relevance judgments on
linguistic cues and (2) whether the neural activity
underlying
death-related
thought
can
predict
dispositional death anxiety. Method: A hybrid design
was used in which participants were presented with
death-related/unrelated words, life-related/unrelated
words, and negative/neutral words in separate sessions.
Participants were scanned using functional magnetic
resonance imaging while they performed death-relevance,
life-relevance, and valence judgments on the words,
respectively. Results: The contrast of death-related vs.
death-unrelated words during death-relevance judgments
revealed transient increased activity in the left inferior
parietal lobule, the right frontal eye field, and the right
superior parietal lobule. The contrast of death-relevance
judgments vs. life-relevance/valence judgments showed
decreased activity in the bilateral insula. The transient
frontoparietal activity was correlated with subjective
reports of death-relevance of linguistic cues, whereas the
sustained insular activity was correlated with
dispositional death anxiety, but only in those with weak
transient frontoparietal responses to death-related words.
Conclusion: Our results dissociate the transient and

	  

D-21
IN VIVO QUANTIFICATION OF MONOAMINE
OXIDASE-A
USING
[11C]-HARMINE
AND
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY IN HUMANS
Jorge Mario Rodríguez-Fernández, Columbia University;

28	  

Christine DeLorenzo, Columbia University; J. John Mann,
Columbia University, New York State Psychiatric Institute;
Ramin V. Parsey, Columbia University, New York State
Psychiatric Institute- Previous studies have shown that
MAO-A binding in the brain can be measured using
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and the radiotracer
Methoxymethylpyridoindole
([11C]-harmine),
which
makes it an ideal candidate to evaluate the monoamine
neurochemistry in neuropsychiatric disorders(1). In order
to determine the optimal modeling parameters for this
radiotracer, a test-retest study was performed. In addition,
the most appropriate reference region for reference tissue
approaches was examined. PET scans of healthy
nonsmoking subjects (n = 5) were performed using [11C]harmine and coregistered with magnetic resonance
imaging data. Each subject was scanned for 120 mins,
ensuring that high binding regions reach equilibrium. Six
different modeling methods were applied and BPP
(regional ligand concentration relative to ligand
concentration in plasma) was calculated based on regional
time activity curves. Five metrics were used to evaluate
the model fits, including percent difference (PD), Within
Subject Mean Sum of Squares (WSMSS), variance,
Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC), and Identifiability
(ID). The two tissue comparment (2TC) model performed
better than the others due to its low variability in BPP
estimates across subjects and within the same subject
(mean PD= 22.6±14.8%, WSMSS= 2.3±2.3 (mL/cm3)2,
variance= 2.79±2.06 mL/cm3 and ICC= 0.22±0.31). The
most appropriate reference region was found to be the
cerebellum, due to the low binding in this region and its
kinetics. Test-retest results indicate that within subject
binding variability of [11C]-harmine is low using a 2TC
model. As such, this tracer may allow characterization of
the neurochemistry of monoamines using PET in the
pathogenesis of panic disorders(2), social phobia(3),
chronic pain(4) and some cases of MDD(5), in which
MAO-A inhibitors are used as second line management(6).

across low and high socioeconomic status. Twenty-two
unmedicated African American participants were scanned
while observing emotionally-valenced stimuli from the
International Affective Picture System as well as validated
images of poverty. Emotionally valenced images as well
as scrambled foils were serially-presented within a block
design paradigm. Subjects were instructed to make a 2alternative forced choice when presented with an
emotionally valenced image or scrambled foil. Image
acquisition was performed on a research-dedicated
Siemens Allegra Magnetron 3 Tesla head dedicated MRI
scanner (maximum gradient strength ~60mT/m, max
gradient slew ~600T/m/s). Image processing and analysis
(linear mixed effects model) were performed using the
FSL software package. Changes of activation (increases or
decreases) were analyzed according to regional a priori
hypothesis, i.e. activation changes in limbic and frontal
regions. Results indicate that people of low SES respond
differently than individuals of higher SES and
demonstrate differential activation patterns in response to
similar images of poverty compared to negatively
valenced stimuli. More specifically, participants defined as
being of lower SES demonstrated attenuated activation in
limbic regions including hippocampal and parahippocampal as well as frontal regions including the superior
frontal gyrus. Results may indicate that low SES
individuals display a diminished emotional response to
the poverty imagery than general negative images. Future
studies in this line may investigate if this response represents a coping mechanism or other adaptive response.
D-23
BRAIN RESPONSE TO FOOD LOGOS IN OBESE AND
HEALTHY WEIGHT CHILDREN Amanda Bruce,
University of Missouri-Kansas City; William Black, University
of Missouri-Kansas City; Jared Bruce, University of MissouriKansas City; Janice Henry, University of Missouri-Kansas City;
Rebecca Lepping, University of Kansas Medical Center; J.
Bradley Cherry, University of Missouri-Kansas City; Vlad
Papa, University of Kansas Medical Center; Laura Martin,
University of Kansas Medical Center; Ann Davis, University of
Kansas Medical Center; Cary Savage, University of Kansas
Medical Center - Product branding has a powerful effect
on both food familiarity and preference. Brain regions
associated with reward and motivation are activated
differentially between obese and healthy weight children’s
brain in response to visual food cues. No neuroimaging
studies have examined how children respond to branded
food logos. The purpose of the present study was to
examine how obese and healthy weight children’s brains
activate in response to common food and nonfood logos.
As part of a validation study, 32 participants aged 9-16 (13
males; mean age 11.5 years) were asked to rate 239
common brand logos on familiarity, valence, and arousal.
The 120 most familiar food and nonfood logos were
selected and matched on the aforementioned attributes.
Examples included Nike®, Playstation® (nonfood),
McDonalds,® and Cheetos® (food). Fourteen healthy
weight children (mean BMI percentile 50.4; 8 males; mean

D-22
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS MODERATES NEURAL
RESPONSE TO IMAGES OF POVERTY Sarah Ketay,
Bard College; Zohn Rosen, Columbia University; Peter
Muennig, Columbia University; Michael Silverman, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine - The relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and health, the income gradient—
the relative increase in mortality with lower income—
accounts for a greater loss of health than any risk factor
other than normal human aging. While there is a
considerable amount of descriptive evidence for how SES
might “get under the skin”, theories regarding how SES
might affect health through psychological pathways
include
stress-induced
pathophysiology,
negative
emotional style, and mental illness. One possibility is that
diminished life satisfaction, such as that associated with
living in an impoverished environment while repeatedly
being exposed to more preferable conditions impacts
psychosocial health. This study examined neural
processing of emotionally valenced stimuli in participants

	  

29	  

age 12.1 years) and ten obese children (mean BMI
percentile 98.1; 6 males; mean age 11.8 years) were then
scanned using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). The paradigm was a block design using the
selected food and nonfood logos, and a blurred baseline
condition. fMRI data were analyzed using Brain Voyager
QX with random effects. Voxel values were considered
significant if the activation survived a statistical threshold
of p < .01 corrected for multiple comparisons with a
cluster level threshold of 7 voxels (p < .05), determined by
Monte Carlo simulation. When compared to healthy
weight children, obese children demonstrated decreased
activation to food versus baseline images in bilateral
middle frontal gyrus BA 10 (450 contiguous voxels; max
voxel 36, 38, 19; t= -4.55, p < .001; 323 contiguous voxels;
max voxel -30,46,7, t= -4.35, p<.001). Similarly, obese
children demonstrated decreased activation to food versus
nonfood logos in two regions of interest: right middle
frontal gyrus BA 10 (308 contiguous voxels; max voxel
27,56,19; t = -4.98; p < .001) and left anterior cingulate BA
32 (443 contiguous voxels, max voxel -9, 41, -5; t = -4.46; p
< .001). Branding has a significant impact on food
preferences but little is known about how children
evaluate branded food items at the neural level. These
preliminary results suggest that food logos activate brain
regions known to be associated with food motivation and
reward. Obese children demonstrated less activation in
brain regions associated with cognitive control when
compared to healthy weight children.

D-25
OXYTOCIN MODULATES SOCIAL APPROACH
BEHAVIOR IN HUMANS Sina Radke, Radboud University
Nijmegen; Karin Roelofs, Radboud University Nijmegen, Ellen
R.A. de Bruijn, Radboud University Nijmegen, Leiden
University - Oxytocin (OXT) is a neuropeptide implicated
in prosociality and the attenuation of responses to stress
and threat. Besides anxiety reduction as an underlying
mechanism, it has been argued that OXT increases the
salience of social stimuli and, more recently, that OXT
facilitates approach-related social behaviors. While
research in humans frequently focuses on perceptual
aspects of emotion processing, animal studies show that
OXT fosters affiliation and social approach behavior.
Approach and avoidance are fundamental responses
associated with appetitive and aversive motivation,
usually triggered by pleasant/positive stimuli (approach)
and threatening/negative stimuli (avoidance). The control
of approach-avoidance behavior has been assessed with
tasks that involve overriding these automatic action
tendencies, e.g. the Approach-Avoidance Task (AAT).
Importantly, although OXT is presumably engaged in
social approach behavior in humans, direct investigations
of these processes have not been conducted until now. The
current study therefore aimed at investigating the role of
OXT on the control of social motivational behavior. Social
anxiety measures were included in the analyses, as it is
known to modulate approach-avoidance behavior. In a
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind withinsubjects design, 24 healthy volunteers received 24 IU OXT
(Syntocinon; Novartis) intranasally. Social anxiety was
assessed with the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. In the
AAT, participants reacted to happy and angry facial
expressions with direct and averted gaze by pulling a
joystick towards (approach) or pushing it away from their
body (avoid). Effect-scores were calculated by subtracting
the individual median RTs for pull from the median RTs
for push movements. Negative effect-scores denote
avoidance, while positive effect-scores reflect approach.
Under PLC, participants displayed the typical action
tendencies, i.e. approach towards happy (M = 14.01) and
avoidance of angry (M = -19.29) faces with both direct and
averted gaze (p = .006). Importantly, OXT altered
approach-avoidance
behavior
towards
emotional
expressions with direct gaze (p = .008). This was driven by
increased approach towards angry faces after OXT
administration (M = 13.00) compared to PLC (M = -10.46,
p = .003), whereas there was no change is response to
angry faces with averted gaze (p = .90). Further, the OXTinduced change of approach-avoidance behavior was
modulated by social anxiety (p = .04): Low socially
anxious individuals exhibited stronger OXT-induced
approach towards social threat signals directed at them.
The general predisposition of approaching positive, while
avoiding negative stimuli, complements earlier findings.
However, OXT administration reversed the avoidance
pattern for angry faces, as participants displayed an OXTinduced approach to these stimuli. This effect was
restricted to angry faces with direct gaze and modulated

D-24
SOCIAL NEUROSCIENCE IN THE NATIONAL
INTEREST Joshua C. Poore, The Charles Stark Draper
Laboratory; Andrea K. Webb, The Charles Stark Draper
Laboratory - In the past decade, the US department of
defense (DoD) and Intelligence Community (IC) has
recognized the potential for the neurosciences to provide
enabling technologies and methodology dramatically
expand their capabilities in key areas of defense, as well as
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR). More
recently, these communities have demonstrated an
increasing demand for social neuroscience to address their
enduring missions and expand their capabilities. In this
talk, we will outline some of the core interests of the DoD
and IC in the social neuroscience, including social
cognitive neuroscience and social affective neuroscience.
Additionally, we will present trends for the inclusion of
calls for social neuroscience in large DoD/IC sponsored
programs within the past few years and describe some of
enabling technologies that these communities are
currently investing in and the impact they may have on
the neurosciences. Finally, we will outline strategies for
academic researchers in social neuroscience to identify
opportunities, get involved in research for both the DoD
and IC, and compete for large funding contracts offered
by these communities.

	  

30	  

by social anxiety. Importantly, social threat can elicit
anxiety and withdrawal, but also aggressive, i.e. approach
behavior. Apart from its anxiolytic effects, OXT has been
linked to maternal aggression in animals and defensive
aggression in humans. Interestingly, our results suggest
that low socially anxious individuals are more susceptible
to the effects of OXT in facilitating social approach-related
behaviors, even when approach does not imply prosocial,
but rather aggressive actions.

screen participants for differences in the ability to take the
perspective of others, we used the Interpersonal Reactivity
Index (IRI), which surveys empathy, with specific interest
in the dispositional perspective-taking subscale. Our
results show that there is no overall treatment effect for
the advisor or the decision-maker in the human or lottery
condition. However, we found an interaction effect
between oxytocin and dispositional perspective-taking for
the decision-maker. People who were more inclined to
take the perspective of others, as determined by the IRI,
trusted less when they were in the oxytocin group than
the control group. These results support the hypothesis
that oxytocin is personality-characteristic dependent. In
summary, this is the first study to show that oxytocin
decreases trust to promote social communication and
consequently increase prosocial behavior.

D-26
EXOGENOUS OXYTOCIN DECREASES TRUST IN
PEOPLE WITH HIGH PERSPECTIVE-TAKING TO
PROMOTE SOCIAL COMMUNICATION Lara Moody,
George Mason University; Mary Lee, NIDA; Raja
Parasuraman, George Mason University; Kevin McCabe,
George Mason University; Peter Twieg, George Mason
University; Ewart de Visser, George Mason University; Martin
O'Hara, INOVA Fairfax Hospital; Frank Krueger, George
Mason University - The neuropetide oxytocin both
modulates social behavior such as trust and varies based
on different personality characteristics. Trust is an
essential aspect of interpersonal relationships. The ability
to determine when to trust relies heavily on our ability to
take the perspective of others and understand the
intentions of all parties in an interaction. Often, we decide
when to trust and not to trust based on communication
between individuals. For example, when a doctor writes a
prescription and recommends that a patient take a
medicine, it is up to the patient to decide whether or not to
trust the doctor and do as the doctor says. In the present
study, we investigated the effect of oxytocin on trusting
behavior in participants with differing abilities to take the
perspective of others. Previous oxytocin studies used the
standard trust game to evaluate interpersonal trust. In this
study, we used a modified trust and communication game
to explore the effects of oxytocin on trusting behavior and
communication. Ninety-six healthy males received either
intranasal oxytocin or placebo in a randomized, doubleblind,
placebo-controlled,
between-subject
design.
Participants played a modified version of a trust and
communication game, in which an advisor makes a
monetary recommendation to another participant, the
decision-maker. The recommendations include one
egalitarian option ($0.30 to both the advisor and the
decision-maker), one trustworthy option ($0.90 to the
advisor and $1.50 to the decision-maker) and one selfish
option ($1.20 to the advisor and $0.90 to the decisionmaker). The decision-makers then choose to trust the
advisor by choosing the recommended option or not to
trust the advisor by choosing another option of unknown
monetary value. After each trial, both advisors and
decision-makers receive feedback indicating if the
recommendation was followed and if they received the
most money. Participants were in the role of both the
advisor and the decision-maker, randomly, throughout
the study. Participants also played trials with both another
human participant and a lottery system programmed to
give random advice and make random decisions. To

	  

D-28
OXYTOCIN
ADMINISTRATION
TO
PARENT
ENHANCES
INFANT
PHYSIOLOGICAL
AND
BEHAVIORAL
READINESS
FOR
SOCIAL
ENGAGEMENT Omri Weisman, Orna Zagoory-Sharon,
Ruth Feldman; Bar-Ilan University - The social milieu
provides the context for the organism's survival,
endurance, and adaptation.
In mammals, social
participation originates within the parent-infant bond and
is supported by the Oxytocin (OT) system, whose
functioning is transmitted from parent to child through
patterns of parental care. Human studies indicate that OT
administration increases affiliative behavior, including
trust, empathy, and social reciprocity. Here we examine
whether OT administration to parent can enhance
physiological and behavioral processes that support
parental social engagement, but, moreover, can have
parallel effects on the infant. Utilizing a double-blind,
placebo-controlled crossover design, 35 fathers and their
five-month-old infants were observed twice following
administration of OT or placebo to father in the face-toface-still-face (FTFSF) paradigm. Parent and infant's
salivary OT was assessed at multiple time-points,
respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) measured in the three
FTFSF episodes, and parent and child's social behaviors
were micro-coded for indices of social engagement. OT
administration increased fathers' salivary OT, RSA during
free play, and key parenting behaviors that support
parental-infant bonding. Parallel increases were also
found in the infant's salivary OT, RSA response, and
engagement behavior, including social gaze, exploration,
and social reciprocity. Results are first to demonstrate that
OT administration to one attachment partner can have
parallel effects on the other and underscore the role of OT
in the cross-generation transmission of human social
participation. Findings have translational implications for
conditions associated with early risk for social-emotional
growth, including autism or prematurity, without the
need to administer drug to young infants.

31	  

previous CyberBall studies through the rejection inclusion
contrast (e.g, Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003).
These were the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the
right insula (RI). Poorer neighborhood quality at 12 years
of age corresponded with greater rejection-related activity
in the ACC (r = .60, p < .01, Cohen’s d = -.64). The ACC is
a neural hub that has been demonstrated to signal
affective distress both for social and physical stressors and
acts as a neural alarm indicating that certain
environmental stimuli require attention (Rainville.,
Duncan, Price, Carrier, & Busnell, 1997; Eisenberger,
Lieberman, & Williams, 2003). Poor neighborhood quality
in young adulthood may encourage heightened ACC
reactivity or “vigilance” toward potential relationships
due to the heightened consequences of rejection in an area
of low social resources and high potential threats.

★

D-29
TESTOSTERONE
AFFECTS
IMPLICIT
SOCIAL
APPROACH-AVOIDANCE TENDENCIES
D. Enter,
Leiden University, Radboud University Nijmegen; P.
Spinhoven, Leiden University; K. Roelofs, Radboud University
Nijmegen, Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging - The
gonadal hormone testosterone plays an important role in
the regulation of social-motivational behavior. Several
studies of testosterone administration to healthy female
participants confirmed the causal relationship between
testosterone and its dominance-enhancing and socialanxiolytic properties. Nevertheless, the effect of
testosterone on social approach-avoidance tendencies has
not yet been investigated. This study set out to test this
effect in healthy female volunteers using an objective
implicit measure of social motivational behavior. Using a
double-blind,
within-subject
design,
twenty-four
participants received a single dose of 0.5mg testosterone
and a matched placebo, at two separate days. On both
days, they performed the social Approach- Avoidance
Task (AAT), a reaction time task requiring participants to
approach or avoid visually presented emotional (happy
and angry) faces, by pulling a joystick towards them or
pushing the joystick away from themselves, respectively.
According to
expectations,
participants
showed
diminished avoidance tendencies to angry faces after
testosterone administration. Social anxiety scores (Social
Phobia and Anxiety Inventory: SPAI) moderated this
effect. These findings suggest that testosterone reduces
social submissive behavior in a healthy female population.
In addition, they further the understanding of the
psychoneuroendocrinological
regulation
of
social
motivational behavior in social psychopathologies, such as
social anxiety disorder.

D-31
REJECTION SENSITIVITY MODULATES NUCLEUS
ACCUMBENS ACTIVITY WHEN ANTICIPATING
SOCIAL FEEDBACK Katherine E. Powers, Dartmouth
College; Leah H. Somerville, Weill Cornell Medical College;
William M. Kelley, Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton,
Dartmouth College- Prior research suggests that humans
have a fundamental need to belong to social groups, and
that some individuals are more attuned to the possibility
of rejection than are others. Specifically, individuals high
in rejection sensitivity tend to anxiously expect and
readily perceive rejection in their social interactions (e.g.,
Downey et al., 2004). Behavioral research on rejection
sensitivity has primarily focused on reactions to rejection,
leaving an understanding of how these individuals behave
while anticipating social feedback less well understood.
Here, we examined neural activity during both
expectations of and reactions to rejection as a function of
rejection sensitivity. Across two studies, participants (N =
41) underwent fMRI scanning while making social
judgments (e.g., “Would this person like me?”) about
supposed peers at other colleges and receiving evaluative
social feedback from those individuals. The nucleus
accumbens, a central component of the brain’s reward
circuitry, was engaged both when participants anticipated
and received evaluative social feedback.
Nucleus
accumbens activity was modulated by rejection sensitivity
when participants anticipated social feedback, such that
individuals high in rejection sensitivity displayed
exaggerated neural responses when anticipating social
feedback compared to individuals low in rejection
sensitivity. Rejection sensitivity, however, had no effect on
nucleus accumbens activity after receiving feedback.
These results highlight the importance of anticipating
evaluative social feedback for individuals high in rejection
sensitivity, and suggest a role for the nucleus accumbens
in these processes.

★

D-30
POORER NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY AT AGE 12
PREDICTS STRONGER ACC ACTIVATION TO
REJECTION SENSITIVITY IN YOUNG ADULTHOOD
Marlen Z. Gonzalez, Lane Beckes, Joanna Chango, Joseph P.
Allen, James A. Coan; University of Virginia - We
investigated the association between neighborhood
quality at 12 years of age and neural correlates of social
rejection. Twenty-two economically and racially diverse
young adult participants were recruited from a
longitudinal community sample originally located in
central Virginia (cf., Hare, Marston, & Allen, 2011). We
created a composite childhood neighborhood quality
variable by aggregating measures of neighborhood
cohesion, level of risk and crime, and overall quality, all
measured at 12 years of age. As adults (ages 23-26),
participants completed the CyberBall task (cf, Eisenberger,
Lieberman, & Williams, 2003), a virtual “catch” game used
to persuade participants that they are being systematically
excluded from playing a game of catch with two other
players. Functional regions of interest (ROIs) were
determined a priori using regions frequently identified in

	  

D-32
IS ALTRUISTIC PUNISHMENT AUTOMATIC?
EFFECTS OF COGNITIVE LOAD ON THE REJECTION
OF UNFAIR OFFERS AND ON MFN AMPLITUDE IN

32	  

THE ULTIMATUM GAME Joana B. Vieira, University of
Porto, Georgetown University; Pedro R. Almeida, University of
Porto; Fernando Ferreira-Santos, University of Porto, UCL;
Francisco Marques-Teixeira, University of Porto; Fernando
Barbosa, University of Porto; Abigail Marsh, Georgetown
University; João Marques-Teixeira, University of Porto - Dualprocess accounts of social cognition consider the existence
of two modes of processing: type 1 (automatic, fast,
unconscious, not requiring working memory) and type 2
(controlled, slow, conscious, requiring working memory)
(Evans, 2008). There is evidence that the rejection of unfair
offers in the Ultimatum Game (UG) is driven by a
negative emotional reaction to unfairness and that the
acceptance of unfair offers requires cognitive effort
(Sanfey et al., 2003). It has also been demonstrated that in
prosocial individuals, inequity aversion is associated with
activation in the amygdala but not in frontal regions,
which further suggests that it results from automatic and
emotional responses, rather than deliberative processes
(Haruno & Frith, 2010). In this study, we explored the
automaticity of altruistic punishment in the UG by
increasing the cognitive load during the task and
analyzing its effect both on performance and on the
Medial Frontal Negativity (MFN). This ERP component is
thought to be generated in the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) (Gehring & Willoughby, 2002) and has been shown
to be sensitive to the fairness of UG offers (Boksem & De
Cremer, 2010; Van der Veen & Sahibdin, 2011). In this
pilot experiment, six subjects performed the UG in two
experimental conditions: No load and Load. In the No
load condition, participants played the classical version of
the UG, while in the Load condition they played a
modified version, in which they were asked to memorize a
sequence of 5 digits at the beginning of each trial and to
recognize it at the end. Subjects played 84 trials of each
condition, counterbalanced across subjects. In each block,
42 unfair (20-33% of the stake) and 42 fair offers (40-50% of
the stake) were presented. Behavioral and electrophysiological data (EEG; 32 channels) were collected.
Analysis of the percentage of acceptances revealed a main
effect of fairness (F (1,5) = 9.63, p = .027), with fair offers
being accepted more often than unfair ones (M(fair) =
83.93, SD = 15.84; M(unfair) = 48.21, SD = 36.44). No effect
of cognitive load or cognitive load*fairness interaction
emerged. No effect of cognitive load on MFN amplitude at
Fz was found. These preliminary results suggest that even
under more cognitively demanding conditions individuals
engage in altruistic punishment and turn down offers that
are perceived as unfair. This is consistent with the results
reported by Haruno and Frirth (2010) regarding subjects
that displayed a prosocial orientation and lends further
support to the notion that, in these individuals, inequity
aversion and consequent altruistic punishment rely on
automatic processes. To further investigate the role of
automatic and controlled processes in social interactions,
ongoing research is exploring the effects of cognitive load
in healthy subjects varying in social value orientation and
also in traits that have been shown to be associated to

	  

abnormal patterns
psychopathy).

of

social

decision-making

(e.g.

D-33
AVERSIVE DISINHIBITION OF BEHAVIOR AND
STRIATAL SIGNALING IN SOCIAL AVOIDANCE
Verena Ly, Radboud University Nijmegen; Roshan Cools,
Radboud University Nijmegen; Karin Roelofs, Radboud
University Nijmegen - Social avoidance is a major factor for
the development and maintenance of anxiety and
depressive symptoms. Although anxiety and depression
have long been associated with abnormal aversive
processing and hyperactive amygdala signalling, the
consequences of these features on decision making and
neural structures implementing action selection, such as
the striatum, remain unclear. Here, we used fMRI to
compare effects of aversive (versus appetitive) processing
on behavioural inhibition versus activation and associated
striatal signals in 42 high and low socially avoidant
individuals. Participants were presented with aversive
(angry) faces and appetitive (happy) faces and had to
learn by trial and error whether to make a ‘go’ or a ‘nogo’
response in order to obtain reward or avoid punishment.
As expected, high compared with low socially avoidant
individuals showed enhanced amygdala signalling for
angry versus happy faces. Interestingly, high compared
with low socially avoidant individuals showed reduced
behavioural inhibition for aversive faces relative to
appetitive faces. Furthermore, this behavioural effect
correlated significantly with greater striatal signal,
associated with behavioural activation, for angry versus
happy faces. The performance pattern resembles that seen
after central serotonin depletion, which also induced
aversive behavioural disinhibition. This observation is
remarkable given that anxiety and depression are often
treated with drugs that enhance serotonin transmission
(selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors). The results
concur with recent theorizing about aversion, serotonin
and behavioural inhibition and suggest that aversive
disinhibition of behavioural and striatal activation might
represent a core phenomenon of serotonin-related
disorders.
D-34
TRAIT ANXIETY MODERATES THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN SOCIAL SUPPORT AND THE NEURAL
RESPONSE TO THREAT. Erin L. Maresh, Lane Beckes,
James A. Coan; University of Virginia - We investigated
whether the neural response to threat of shock was
associated with trait anxiety and how this effect might be
influenced by social support. We scanned 22 individuals
using fMRI while facing threat of shock under three
conditions: alone (alone condition), while holding the
hand of a stranger (stranger condition), and while holding
the hand of a friend (partner condition). Higher trait
anxiety was significantly associated with lower threatrelated brain activation during the alone condition in the
thalamus, amygdala, supplementary motor cortex, and
putamen. Threat-related activation during the stranger

33	  

condition was unrelated to trait anxiety. During the
partner condition, however, greater threat-related activity
in the thalamus was associated with higher trait anxiety
scores. A similar pattern was subsequently observed in an
independent sample of 24 adults in same-sex romantic
partnerships. Here too, higher trait anxiety was associated
with lower threat-related brain activity in multiple brain
areas, including the nucleus accumbens, posterior
cingulate
cortex,
orbitofrontal
cortex,
putamen,
supramarginal gyrus, precentral gyrus, insula, and
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, but only during the alone
condition—no similar associations were observed in either
the stranger or partner conditions. Because trait anxiety
was associated with less threat-related activity, we
hypothesized that people with higher trait anxiety simply
have a higher “baseline” neural response in threat
responsive brain regions while alone, resulting in less
signal change between the safety and threat conditions. To
investigate this, we contrasted brain activity in the
safety/alone condition with brain activity in both the
safety/stranger and safety/partner conditions and
examined the correlation of this activity with trait anxiety.
No signification correlations were found, implying that
the negative correlations between trait anxiety and brain
activation are not due to increased baseline threat-related
activity in the alone condition. An alternative possibility is
that trait anxiety is a form of chronic stress, which has
itself been associated with habituation to threat cues
(reviewed in Grissom & Bhatnagar, 2009). Our findings
may indicate that higher trait anxiety may, even at subclinical levels, lead to increased habituation to stress,
dampening adaptive neural threat responses in the
absence of social resources. Further research on what is
mediating this effect and why it was not seen in the
presence of social support is warranted. 	  

photos of their peers by their social proximity (i.e. best
friend to most distant acquaintance) and then based on the
geographic proximity of the home of each peer to their
home (i.e., closest to most distant). In Session 2, fMRI was
used to assess functional brain activity. Participants
completed 5 functional runs. On each trial, participants
were simultaneously presented with photos of two peers.
During half of the blocks in a run participants indicated
which of the two peers was psychologically closest to
them and during the other half, they indicated which peer
lived geographically closest to them. In addition, photos of
‘best friends’, ‘close friends’ and ‘acquaintances’ were
presented in separate blocks during the social proximity
condition and photos of the same peers that lived ‘closest’,
‘medium-distance’, and ‘far’ were presented in separate
blocks during the social proximity condition and photos
of the same peers that lived ‘closest’, ‘medium-distance’,
and ‘far’ were presented in separate blocks during the
geographical proximity condition. Standard localizer runs
were used to individually define the FFA and
parahippocampal place area (PPA). We predicted that (a)
activity in brain regions that have been associated with
high-level social information processing (e.g., ATL,
amygdala, medial PFC) would increase with levels of
psychological closeness but not with levels of
geographical closeness; (b) that activity in brain regions
associated with spatial information processing (e.g., PPA
and/or retrosplenial cortex) would increase with levels of
geographical closeness but not with levels of
psychological closeness. Preliminary results show greater
activation of areas of the brain (ATL, medial PFC)
implicated in social information processing when
participants made judgments about the social proximity of
peers in their social networks compared to their
geographical distance.

D-35
NEURAL DECODING OF BEST FRIEND OR
FRENEMY Rebecca J. Von Der Heide, Temple University;
Ingrid R. Olson, Temple University - Social networks have
two important dimensions: the number of individuals in
the network and the quality or complexity of the
relationships with the individuals in the network. The
number or size of one’s social network has been shown to
correlate with the size of brain regions devoted to
processing complex social information such as the
amygdala (Bickart et al., 2011; Kanai et al., 2011). Less is
known about the neural basis of the second dimension, the
quality of social networks. In this study we asked whether
parts of the brain that have a known role in person
perception (the fusiform face area) and person knowledge
(the anterior temporal lobe (ATL)) play an important role
in processing social closeness, the variable that allows us
to classify individuals as ‘best friend’ or ‘frenemy’ for
instance. Social closeness was compared to assessments of
geographic closeness of the same peers. Participants were
asked to bring in 2 different photos of the faces of 5 best
friends, 5 close friends, and 5 acquaintances to the first
testing session. In Session 1, they rank ordered these

D-36
KNOW YOUR ENEMY - A FUNCTIONAL APPROACH
TO GROUP BIASES IN MOTOR RESONANCE. Jennifer
Gutsell, University of Toronto; Michael Inzlicht, University of
Toronto - Motor resonance refers to the vicarious activation
of the neural system for action during perception of action
and is considered important for an intuitive
understanding of other’s actions, intentions and emotions.
Motor resonance, however, is restricted to social in-groups
such that people show less motor resonance when
observing ethnic out-group members, as compared to ingroup members performing neutral actions – an effect
magnified by prejudice and for disliked groups. Reduced
motor resonance in response to out-group members thus
seems to be yet another detrimental aspect of prejudice,
potentially
hampering
social
coordination
and
interactions. A functional approach to motor resonance,
however, suggests that these biases might be overwritten
when the actions of an out-group member become
motivational relevant, for example when they are
threatening.
Using
electroencephalographic
(EEG)
oscillations as an index of motor resonance, we investigate
how the meaning and intention of out-group member’s

	  

34	  

actions influence motor resonance in the observer.
Participants watched videos of ethnic in- and out-group
members displaying positive, threatening and neutral
actions and expressions. Reflecting group biases in motor
resonance, participants generally show activity over motor
areas in response to in-group members, but not in
response to out-members. Interestingly, as predicted by a
functional account to motor resonance, only when the
actions and expressions of out-group members are
threatening, do participants show an increase in motor
resonance. Therefore, faced by a threatening out-group
member participants no longer show an in-group bias in
motor resonance.

Administration; Rodolphe J. Gentili, University of Maryland;
Craig G. McDonald, George Mason University; Seppo E. IsoAhola, University of Maryland; Bradley D. Hatfield, University
of Maryland - The orienting of attention to novel stimuli is
critical to human performance in that it facilitates
individuals’ cognitive processing of unexpected events
relevant to task execution. As cognitive load increases,
attentional resources are depleted, limiting the ability to
attend to novel stimuli and hindering performance. A
number of factors have been shown to affect the cognitive
load a task imposes upon individuals’ while they perform
in non-team environments. However, individuals often
perform tasks in team environments (e.g., military,
athletic, & industrial settings). Team environments vary in
quality such that adaptive team environments, which are
characterized by high levels of perceived competence of
and trust in one’s teammates as well as task-cohesion, are
associated with superior individual performance, whereas
maladaptive team environments, which can be
characterized by low levels of these factors, are associated
with poor performance. Despite the frequency with which
individuals perform in team environments of variable
quality as well as the robust relationship between
allocation of attentional resources to novel stimuli and
performance, the impact of team environment on
allocation of attentional resources has only recently begun
to be investigated. The electroencephalographic (EEG)
technique can be employed to assess the allocation of
attentional resources to novel stimuli. Specifically, the
reflexive orientation of attention to novel stimuli can be
inferred from the magnitude of the electrocortical
response to these stimuli, in particular, the novelty-P3
event-related potential (ERP). Higher novelty-P3
amplitudes indicate increased allocation of attentional
resources to stimuli. To examine the impact of team
environment on the allocation of attentional resources to
novel stimuli, the novelty-P3 elicited by unexpected
auditory stimuli was assessed while participants
performed a cognitive-motor task (the videogame Tetris®)
in neutral, adaptive, and maladaptive team environments.
Tetris® performance was significantly better in the
adaptive team environment than the neutral and
maladaptive team environments. Participants exhibited
significantly attenuated novelty-P3 amplitudes in the
maladaptive team environment in comparison to the
neutral and adaptive team environments. Amplitude of
the novelty-P3 was undifferentiated between the neutral
and adaptive team environments. Results suggest that
participants exhibited a reduction in attentional orienting
to novel stimuli in a maladaptive team environment in
comparison to neutral and adaptive team environments.
Attentional allocation did not differ between a neutral and
adaptive team environment. As the ability to allocate
attentional resources is inversely related to the cognitive
load imposed by task performance, it was concluded that
participants performing in a maladaptive team
environment experienced a greater cognitive burden
relative to when they were engaging in neutral and
adaptive team environments. Additionally, as task

D-37
SITUATIONAL
DISCOUNTING
OF
POSITIVE
OUTGROUP BEHAVIORS Jennifer Kubota, New York
University; Tobias Brosch, University of Geneva; Rachel
Mojdehbakhsh, New York University; James S. Uleman, New
York University; Elizabeth Phelps, New York University Social psychological theory suggests that individuals have
a propensity to ignore situational information when
making attributions to others’ behavior (known as the
fundamental attribution error, FAE), and that
incorporating situational information into attributions
requires an additional controlled correctional step. Recent
neuroimaging research finds that incorporating situational
information into attributions is associated with increases
in activity in DLPFC. This research extended these
findings to intergroup attributions. The Ultimate
Attribution Error (UAE) represents a systematic
ethnocentric bias whereby positive outgroup and negative
ingroup behaviors are attributed to situational causes,
whereas positive ingroup and negative outgroup
behaviors are attributed to dispositional causes. To assess
this, participants provided attribution ratings for Black
and White targets. For each target, participants read a
positive or a negative behavior, as well as qualifying
situational information. Overall, we found mixed support
for the UAE. For negative behaviors, individuals made
more situational attributions for ingroup compared to
outgroup members. However, for positive behaviors,
individuals made similar dispositional attributions for
both ingroup and outgroup members. Our findings
suggest that biased intergroup attributions were more
common in negative compared to positive scenarios. For
negative behaviors, when ingroup members behave in
stereotype inconsistent ways, situational information can
be incorporated into judgments and this is achieved most
likely through an additional controlled correctional step in
the attribution process.
D-38
THE EFFECT OF TEAM ENVIRONMENT ON THE
ALLOCATION OF ATTENTIONAL RESOURCES TO
NOVEL STIMULI
Matthew W. Miller, University of
Maryland; Alessandro Presacco, University of Maryland; Sean
Burr, University of Maryland; Lawrence J. Groman, University
of Maryland; Jeremy C. Rietschel, Veterans Health

	  

35	  

performance was superior in an adaptive team
environment relative to a neutral team environment while
attentional resource allocation was undifferentiated, it was
concluded that participants performing in an adaptive
team environment were able to attain their superior
performances without corresponding increases in
cognitive effort. The present study suggests that
maladaptive team environments diminish allocation of
attentional resources to novel stimuli and adaptive team
environments facilitate task performance without
increasing cognitive load.

(1, 28) = 4.23, p = .06). Further analyses reveal that
differences in trait openness to experiences and were
related to physiological reactions to negative affect (b =
.35, p = .10) expressed by virtual humans, and that these
differences may be partially accountable for interaction
order effects. Taken together, this pilot study suggests that
high-fidelity virtual humans may be effective in emulating
real-human interactions, given similarities at the
physiological level. As a result, this technology may be an
effective avenue for training social skills and interpersonal
intervention strategies. Furthermore, that physiological
features related to nervous system activity can
discriminate between experiences related to perceived
affect encourages future research into using physiological
and neurological signals measured from simple contact
sensors to drive the behavior of virtual agents, making
more adaptable and authentic social skills training
platforms.

D-39
EMULATING SOCIALITY: A COMPARISON STUDY
OF PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS FROM HUMAN AND
VIRTUAL SOCIAL INTERACTIONS. Joshua C. Poore,
The Charles Stark Draper Laboratory; Andrea K. Webb, The
Charles Stark Draper Laboratory; Matthew J. Hays, USC
Institute for Creative Technologies; Julia Campbell, USC
Institute for Creative Technologies; Matthew Trimmer, USC
Institute for Creative Technologies; Laura M. Major, The
Charles Stark Draper Laboratory - Mediating interpersonal
conflicts requires a complex set of skills best gained
through well structured practice. This study provides pilot
data from an evaluation of a conflict-mediation training
platform that features a high-fidelity virtual human
designed to emulate real-human interactions. Specifically,
we tracked physiological signals from participants during
their interactions with the virtual human and compared
them to signals during their interaction with a live human
actor. A total of 21 participants were recruited from Naval
Reserve Officer Training Corps (NROTC) programs at
major southern California undergraduate institutions. The
participants completed an intake questionnaire featuring a
personality inventory (BFI; John, et al., 1991) and other
measures prior to attending a laboratory session. During
the laboratory session, the participants interacted with
both a virtual human and a real human actor using the
same semi-structured conflict mediation script; both
human actors and virtual humans expressed the same
affect and mannerisms during interactions. Presentation
order was counterbalanced and participants were
instrumented for electrocardiography (ECG) and
electrodermal activity (EDA) during their interactions.
Analyses used signals averaged across interactions as well
as signals averaged across events wherein actors/virtual
humans expressed specific affect (i.e., exasperation,
irritation, etc.). No statistically significant differences
between the two interactions for EDA. Inter-beat interval
(calculated from ECG) was significantly longer during
interactions with actors, compared to interactions with
virtual humans (t = 2.97, p < .01), however, these
differences were driven by interaction-order effects.
Event-related analyses reveal that IBI, but not GSR,
discriminated between different affect expressed by actors
and virtual humans (F (2, 28) = 4.98, p < .05). And, while
IBI also revealed difference between human and virtual
interaction partners (F (2, 28) = 4.98, p < .05), these effects
were moderated by interactions with presentation order (F

	  

D-40
SOCIAL RANK IN ECONOMIC DECISION-MAKING
Sagan A. Schultz, New York University; Lasana Harris, Duke
University; Mauricio R. Delgado, Rutgers University; Elizabeth
A. Phelps, New York University - Using the tools of
economics we examined how social ranking, or one’s
position held in society, modulates human choice.
Previous research has demonstrated that losing the social
competition of an auction is linked to a striatal ‘loss’
response that is correlated with how much participants
‘overbid’ in relation to the Nash equilibrium (Delgado et
al., 2005). These results suggest the fear of losing the social
competition inherent in an auction is linked to
overbidding behavior.
It is therefore plausible that
another type of loss, namely loss in the form of decreased
social rank, might also result in increased overbidding. In
two separate experiments, participants competed in a
dynamic auction game bidding against a single partner for
monetary goods.
The participants were then given
feedback about their performance relative to their partner.
Our findings show that participants ranked as “worse”
than their opponent made significant changes to their
original bidding strategy in the form of increased
overbidding, while those ranked “better” did not.
Interestingly, this act of overbidding produced a
significant loss in potential monetary earnings. These
results indicate one of the means by which social rank
may play a modulatory role in choice behavior.
D-41
EFFECTS OF SOCIAL NETWORK ON REWARDRELATED BOLD SIGNALS IN A COMPETITIVE
CONTEXT Dominic S. Fareri, Rutgers University; Michael
A. Niznikiewicz, Rutgers University; Meredith P. Johnson,
Rutgers University; Mauricio R. Delgado, Rutgers University Extensive research implicates corticostriatal circuitry as
critical for reward-related processing, showing sensitivity
to outcome valence (e.g., positive vs. negative) and the
motivational context in which outcomes are experienced.
These findings extend to the social domain, as striatal and

36	  

prefrontal regions process social outcomes (e.g.,
Somerville et al., 2006; Izuma et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2011)
and outcomes across differing social contexts (e.g.,
cooperative, competitive; Rilling et al., 2004, Delgado et
al., 2008). Evidence suggests that when participants
engage in competition with a computer, whereby
computer losses signify a positive outcome for
participants, the striatum monitors the competitor’s losses
(Howard-Jones et al., 2010), and other work indicates a
role for medial prefrontal regions coming online during
strategic interactions (Hampton et al., 2008). However, we
typically engage in a variety of behaviors (e.g.,
cooperative, competitive) with others whom may be
within or outside of our social network (e.g., close friend,
new business colleague). It is yet unclear whether the
experience of positive and negative outcomes in a
competitive context varies as a function of social network.
MRI participants played a card-guessing game (adapted
from Delgado et al., 2000) against three different
competitors: a close friend, a confederate, and a random
number generator (non-social condition). The goal of this
task was to guess whether the value of a card would be
higher or lower than 5. MRI participants’ role alternated
during the task, from making the guesses (Player) and
observing their competitors make the guesses (Spectator).
Correct guesses resulted in monetary gain for the
respondent and no gain for the competitor, whereas
incorrect guesses resulted in no monetary gain for the
respondent, but monetary gain for the competitor.
Preliminary neuroimaging analysis reveals a main effect
of competitor during outcome processing in corticostriatal
circuitry. A region of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in
particular demonstrates a more positive BOLD response
during outcomes won or lost against their friend, as
compared to the confederate or random number
generator. This suggests that competing for outcomes
with an in-network other may carry more positive value
than when competing with an out of network or nonsocial entity. Future analysis will further probe effects of
individual difference measures on the BOLD response
during outcome processing, as well as connectivity
between regions of corticostriatal circuitry at the time of
outcome.

study), participants were included or excluded in a game
of Cyberball. They either received money each time they
did not receive the ball, or they did not. In the behavioral
study we measured participant’s need satisfaction
immediately after Cyberball to investigate how
participant’s feelings of distress. Results showed that
although participants’ need satisfaction was lower when
they were excluded than when they were included,
financial compensation buffered these effects in the
exclusion condition. In addition to self-reported distress,
in the second study we also used fMRI to investigate
whether the pain and distress caused by social exclusion
could be financially compensated. Participants first played
an inclusion game and subsequently an exclusion game,
both in the scanner. Moreover, we were not only
interested in intrapersonal feelings, but also in
interpersonal behavior. That is, we tested how financial
compensation would mitigate subsequent money
allocations. After the Cyberball game, participants played
a dictator game (Forsythe, Horowitz, Savin, & Sefton,
1994), where they could offer new money (i.e., not the
money that they had received in the Cyberball) to the
players who had excluded them, players who included
them, and unrelated others.
fMRI results showed
increased activation in the bilateral anterior insula when
participants did not receive the ball in the exclusion game,
compared to when participants did not receive the ball in
the inclusion game. When looking at the effects of
financial compensation, we found increased activation in
the dACC, a region found active during physical and
social pain, when participants did not receive money,
compared to when they did. These results suggest that the
negative experience of social exclusion was mitigated
when participants were financially compensated. The
dictator game results revealed that participants offered
less to those that excluded them than to those that
included them or to unrelated others. However, the offers
to the players that had excluded participants were higher
when participants were financially compensated,
compared to when they were not. We thus showed that
money not only affects social exclusion during or right
after the experience, but also subsequent interpersonal
behavior in a dictator game. Although the negative effects
of social exclusion have been shown to be very powerful,
financially compensating these feelings thus reduces the
negative experience.	  

D-42
A PENNY FOR YOUR PAIN? THE FINANCIAL
COMPENSATION OF SOCIAL PAIN AFTER SOCIAL
EXCLUSION Gert-Jan Lelieveld, Leiden University; Bregtje
Gunther Moor, University of Amsterdam; Eveline A. Crone,
Leiden University; Johan C. Karremans, Radboud University
Nijmegen; Ilja van Beest, Tilburg University; - Previous
research has shown that only a few factors can really
mitigate the distress caused by social exclusion. In the
current work, we directed our attention to a factor that has
received mixed support (Van Beest & Williams, 2006;
Zhou, Vohs, & Baumeister, 2009). We focus on the effects
of money on social exclusion. We investigated whether the
distress caused by social exclusion can be financially
compensated. In two studies (a behavioral and an fMRI

	  

D-43
AMYGDALA AND VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX STRUCTURAL VARIATION PREDICT
MEMORY FOR IMPRESSIONS IN OLDER ADULTS
Brittany S. Cassidy, Brandeis University; Avi Aizenman,
Brandeis University; Angela H. Gutchess, Brandeis University
- Past lesion work has illustrated the importance of
amygdala integrity in the retention of impressions
(Todorov & Olson, 2008). Other research has shown that
increased thickness in ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) corresponds with enhanced fear extinction
(Milad, et. al., 2005), highlighting the salience of this

37	  

region in remembering emotional information. Recent
neuroimaging work suggests that there exists a
specialized neural system underlying social information
and memory that functionally, may be relatively spared
with age. With advancing age, the cortex thins and
subcortical volumes atrophy. Memory for social
information, while potentially spared with age, may
partially rely on the integrity of the regions involved in
this social processing system. We investigated how the
integrity of regions involved in socioemotional memory
(vmPFC, amygdala) and regions implicated in explicit
memory (hippocampus) affected memory for impressions
in young and older adults. Anatomical scans for fifteen
young and fifteen older adults were obtained using MRI,
and reconstructed to gather information about cortical
thickness and subcortical volume. Young adults had
greater amygdala and hippocampus volumes relative to
old, although there was no difference in vmPFC thickness
between the age groups. All participants completed a
behavioral task in which they formed impressions of faces
paired with trait-inferring sentences. During the task, they
responded to prompts that were interpersonally
meaningful (“Do I want this person to play a role in my
life?”), social but interpersonally irrelevant (“Does this
person have a pet?”) or non-social (“Does the sentence
have any three-syllable words?”) after forming
impressions. Participants additionally completed a
retrieval task where they viewed all previously seen faces
with two behavioral traits listed below, and chose which
trait they remembered as being associated with the face.
Across all participants, greater left amygdala volume
predicted enhanced overall memory for impressions.
However, when split by age group, this relationship held
for older, but not younger, adults. Additionally, increased
right vmPFC thickness in older adults correlated with
enhanced memory for impressions formed in the
interpersonally meaningful context, whereas young adults
did not display this relationship. Interestingly, although
older adults had decreased left hippocampal volume
relative to young, hippocampal volume was not predictive
of memory for impressions. Overall, these findings
demonstrate the importance of the integrity of regions
linked to socioemotional processing in the retention of
impressions with age, and support the existence of a social
memory system relatively independent of the
hippocampus.

members, a phenomenon known as parochialism. Recent
evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging
studies suggests that among other areas the temporoparietal junction (TPJ) plays a key role in discriminating
ingroup and outgroup members in perception, judgments
and in affecting parochialism. However, functional
imaging studies, although indispensable, do not permit
causal inferences about the effect of brain processes on
human judgments and behaviour, because the observed
neural activations might just be an epiphenomenon or a
consequence and not necessarily the cause of the
judgments or behaviour. In contrast, brain stimulation
techniques, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) allow researchers to draw causal conclusions about
the behavioural impact of the stimulated brain region.
Here we studied whether diminishing neural activity in
the TPJ by means of neuro-navigated repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) impacts
parochialism. We recruited 36 fans of two rival soccer
teams. Subjects` parochialism was measured in a thirdparty punishment game, where subjects as third-parties
could assign costly punishment points towards out- and
ingroup members on the basis of their decisions in a
previously played prisoner’s dilemma game (PDG).
Behavioural studies show that third-parties punish
outgroup members, who committed a norm violation in
the PDG, more strongly than ingroup members. Our
research question was whether disrupting TPJ function
would reduce this parochial punishment. For that
purpose, subjects received low-frequency (1Hz) rTMS
before playing the third-party punishment game, either
over the right (n=13) or the left TPJ (n=12), or sham
stimulation (n=11). We were able to demonstrate that the
transient disruption of the right TPJ diminishes parochial
punishment: Subjects with a temporarily inhibited right
TPJ punished out- and ingroup members more equally
compared to those subjects in the left TPJ and sham
stimulation group. We were thus able to provide the first
causal evidence that the right TPJ – an area known to be
involved in perspective-taking, mentalizing, and moral
judgment – might be decisive in parochialism. We discuss
the possible functional role of this area in parochialism
and its significance for our social functioning in general.

★

D-45
HOW SOCIAL IS PROSOCIALITY? COMPARING THE
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PROSOCIAL AND SELFORIENTED MOTIVATION. J. L. Livingston, A. C. Savine,
T. S. Braver; Washington University in St. Louis - Recent
findings have clearly demonstrated that self-oriented
motivational incentives (e.g., earning money, praise, or
consumed rewards for the self) can enhance executive
function and goal pursuit. These enhancements have been
found not only in terms of behavioral indicators, but also
in modulations of neural activity in brain regions
associated with reward and cognitive control, during
attention, working memory, and task-switching
paradigms. However, human motivation is often prosocial

★

D-44
DIMINISHING PAROCHIALISM IN INTERGROUP
CONFLICT BY DISRUPTING THE RIGHT TEMPOROPARIETAL JUNCTION Thomas Baumgartner*, University
of Basel; Bastian Schiller*, University of Basel; Jörg Rieskamp,
University of Basel; Daria Knoch, University of Basel; * The
first two authors equally contributed to this work. - Social
groups constitute the building blocks of human society
and influence our behaviour strongly. While people show
extraordinary altruistic behaviour towards ingroup
members, they often act with hostility towards outgroup

	  

38	  

in nature (e.g., giving benefit to another); it is not known
whether prosocial motivation might engage similar or
distinct neural mechanisms from that engaged by selforiented motivation. In the current study, participants
performed cued task-switching in two separate mixed
block-event related fMRI scanning sessions that were
analogous in structure and differed only in terms of
motivational incentives (self-oriented vs. prosocial)
available for optimal performance. In each session,
participants met a confederate whom they believed would
simultaneously participate in the experiment. In the selforiented condition, participants earned money for
themselves, whereas in the pro-social condition,
participants earned money for the confederate.
Behaviorally,
both
self-oriented
and
prosocial
motivational incentives enhanced cognitive control and
reduced task-switch costs, but via distinct performance
profiles. Consistent with prior work, brain activation
increases were observed in cognitive control and reward
regions in both incentive conditions, relative to baseline.
Most notably, increased sustained activity in right dorsal
lateral PFC was observed in the self-oriented condition
relative to the prosocial condition, but for transient
activity, the reverse was observed. This finding supports
the idea that prosocial motivation and self-oriented
motivation produce distinct effects on cognitive control
strategy. We explore the extent to which this distinction is
primarily social in nature or is instead related to the
abstract nature of prosocial rewards.

imaging (fMRI) scans where they viewed the same videos
of coherent and scrambled biological motion, which
allowed us to cross-validate the measurement of brain
activation to biological motion using two distinct
neuroimaging
modalities.
Several
methodological
strategies were used to attempt to account for the poor
spatial resolution of fNIRS measurements compared to
fMRI. First, we took into account variability inherent in
optical neuroimaging by coregistering fNIRS data with
structural MRI images in each participant, and in turn
normalizing the location of recording channels into
standard space. This coregistration also allowed us to
identify recording channels in specific regions of interest
unique to each participant’s structural morphology,
providing more accurate and individualized analyses of
functional activation measured with fNIRS. Results: Brain
responses to coherent versus scrambled biological motion
(collapsed across the three time points) measured with
fNIRS correlated with brain responses to identical stimuli
measured with fMRI in the same participant group.
Compared to baseline, social inclusion increased brain
responses to biological motion in right posterior STS and
supramarginal gyrus. There was no significant
modulation of activation to biological motion postexclusion compared to baseline. Analysis methods for
fNIRS employed in the current study allowed us to
replicate brain responses to biological motion measured
with fNIRS and fMRI in an identical participant group. In
addition, subtle experience-dependent fluctuations of
these brain responses were detected with fNIRS,
demonstrated here by the manipulation of social
inclusion. These results suggest that future studies using
fNIRS can measure brain responses to such point-light
displays in young children and infants. Specifically,
investigating these brain responses in infants at high risk
for developing autism may illuminate early neural
markers of the disorder, as brain responses to such stimuli
have been identified as a potential neural endophenotype
in children with autism.

D-46
SOCIAL INCLUSION ENHANCES BIOLOGICAL
MOTION PROCESSING: A FUNCTIONAL NEARINFRARED SPECTROSCOPY STUDY
Danielle Z.
Bolling, Kevin A. Pelphrey, Martha D. Kaiser; Yale University
- Humans are especially tuned to the movements of other
people. Neural correlates of this social attunement have
been proposed to lie in the right posterior superior
temporal sulcus (STS), which robustly responds to
biological motion in contrast to a variety of non-biological
motions. This response persists even when no form
information is provided, as in point-light displays. No
study to date has investigated the effects of social
interactions on subsequent neural responses to biological
motion. The current study explored the effects of social
inclusion and exclusion on brain responses to point-light
displays of coherent and scrambled biological motion in
the right frontal and temporal lobes using functional nearinfrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). During an fNIRS scan,
participants (12 healthy adults) viewed ten distinct 24second videos of point-light displays of coherent and
scrambled biological motion (alternating) at three time
points in the experiment: baseline, post-social inclusion,
and post social-exclusion. The experiences of social
inclusion and exclusion were elicited using Cyberball, an
online ball-toss game, where participants were either
included or excluded from a game of catch on the
computer for 30 throws. All participants in the fNIRS
study also underwent functional magnetic resonance

	  

D-47
BRAIN MECHANISMS FOR EXPERIENCING AND
IMAGINING AFFECTIVE TOUCH Molly V. Lucas, Yale
Child Study Center; Laura C. Anderson, Yale Child Study
Center; Kevin A. Pelphrey, Yale Child Study Center; Martha D.
Kaiser, Yale Child Study Center - Recent work in our
laboratory has implicated a number of social brain regions
in processing pleasant, affective touch targeting a special
class of nerve fibers, C-tactile (CT) afferents. CT-afferents,
present only in the hairy skin of mammals, respond to
slow gentle touch ranging from 1-10cm/s. Such touch is
reminiscent of that shared in social interactions between
bonded individuals. Our initial fMRI study comparing the
brain response to CT-targeted touch (to the hairy skin of
the forearm) and non-CT touch (to the glabrous skin of the
palm) implicated portions of the insula, the right posterior
superior temporal sulcus/gyrus (STS/STG) and the
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) in processing CTtargeted affective touch. It is unclear whether participants

39	  

were imagining or visualizing the touch, which may have
influenced the brain regions identified as important for
processing CT vs. non-CT touch. Thus, we sought to
examine whether imagining and experiencing gentle
touch processed by CT-afferents recruit similar or distinct
brain mechanisms. In the current fMRI study, typical
adults experienced and imagined gentle brush strokes to
their right forearm and palm in alternating blocks
(Experience Arm, Imagine Arm, Experience Palm, Imagine
Palm). Auditory instructions preceded each block, and
participants wore sleep masks to eliminate visual
stimulation. During the experience blocks, a trained
experimenter used a watercolor brush to stroke the arm
(CT-afferents) and palm (lacking CT-afferents) at a
pleasant, CT-optimal speed of 8cm/s. During the imagine
blocks, participants were instructed to imagine the same
two types of touch. Experience Arm blocks preceded
Imagine Arm blocks, and Experience Palm blocks
preceded Imagine Palm blocks to facilitate the imagining
for each condition. Preliminary analyses have focused on
similarities between experiencing and imagining gentle
touch to the arm versus the palm. A contrast of Experience
Arm + Imagine Arm > Experience Palm + Imagine Palm
revealed a network of regions including posterior
STS/STG, ventral mPFC, temporal pole, and anterior
insula. The differential response to arm and palm touch
was comparable in the experience and imagine conditions
in all of these regions indicating a network of brain
regions supporting both actually experiencing gentle
touch processed by the CT-system and imagining such
touch. In addition, we found a significant difference in the
anterior insula response to Experience Arm and Imagine
Arm. Specifically, imagining CT-targeted touch to the arm
elicited a greater response than experiencing it. Initial
results from this fMRI study suggest that overlapping
brain mechanisms support experiencing and imagining
affective touch processed by CT-afferents. Key social brain
regions including the posterior STS/STG region, mPFC,
temporal pole, and anterior insula were differentially
involved in processing both experiencing and imagining
gentle touch to the arm versus the palm. Involvement of
these regions in processing arm touch highlights the
inherently social nature of the CT-system. These results
support the hypothesis that the anterior insula is involved
in re-representing sensory input (i.e., interpreting the
affective content of touch). Our preliminary findings help
to characterize the function of key social brain regions and
deepen our understanding of the brain mechanisms
underlying affective touch processing.

countless social neuroscience studies implicate medial
prefrontal cortex (MPFC), tempoparietal junction (TPJ),
and posterior cingulate/precuneus (PC/PCC), dubbed the
mentalizing network, in social cognitive processing (e.g.
Frith & Frith, 2003; 2006), no extant studies have examined
how this network responds to systematic increases in
social cognitive information. This is problematic, because
it is unclear how the mentalizing network would respond
to increases in social cognitive demands. While these
regions have been shown to engage in simple social
cognition tasks relative to cognitive control tasks, another
line of research from cognitive neuroscience consistently
finds that these regions deactivate during effortful
cognition including working memory (Grecius & Menon,
2004; McKiernan et al., 2003; Metzak et al., 2011). In fact,
the mentalizing network is virtually identical to a network
dubbed the default-mode network, so named because it is
more active when individuals are at rest (i.e. by default)
than when they engage in a variety of effortful cognitive
tasks. The critical caveat however is that previous studies
from the default-mode literature have only examined
increases in effortful processing with cognitive and
perceptual load. None of the studies linking increased
effort with decreased activity in the mentalizing network
have examined increased effort associated with increased
social task demands. To address this question, we
developed a novel delayed-response social working
memory task that varied social cognitive effort on a trialby-trial basis. During scanning, participants completed
trials in which they were presented with the names of two,
three, or four of their friends, mentally ranked their
friends along a trait dimension during a delay period, and
answered a true/false question about their rank order.
Parametric analyses showed linear increases in activation
as a function of increasing social demand in the
mentalizing/default-mode network. Moreover, nearly all
of the regions within the mentalizing/default network
were also significantly more active compared to a resting
baseline. In common social cognition paradigms, regions
within the mentalizing and default mode network show
increased activity compared to a non-social control task
(i.e., judgments about the physical world; e.g. Mitchell et
al., 2005); however they typically show decreased or no
activity compared to a resting baseline. Therefore, it is
difficult to claim that regions are optimized for social
cognition when the tasks used to assess social cognition
produce less activity than what is observed during rest.
The current data suggest that these prior findings might
be due to the lower difficulty levels of prior social
cognition tasks. Our results reaffirm the role of these
regions in social cognition and suggest the possibility that
during rest, individuals are engaged in more complex or
effortful social cognition than what is demanded by most
fMRI studies of social cognition.

D-48
SOCIAL WORKING MEMORY AND THE NEUROSCIENCE OF EFFORTFUL SOCIAL COGNITION
Meghan L. Meyer, UCLA; Robert P. Spunt, UCLA; Matthew
D. Lieberman, UCLA - Whether keeping track of three
friends' perspectives in a conversation, a roomful of
colleagues' beliefs during a conference, or the political
ideology of someone we just met, we constantly juggle
variable amounts of social cognitive information. While

	  

D-50
FROM VOXELS TO MORPHEMES: LINKING
NEUROIMAGING
DATA
WITH
MACHINE
LEARNING ASSESSMENTS OF LANGUAGE USAGE

40	  

TO GAIN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL INSIGHT
Matthew Brook O’Donnell, University of Michigan; Emily B.
Falk, University of Michigan; Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA A central goal for social neuroscience is to link neural
activity during controlled laboratory paradigms with
social phenomena in the real world. An example of the
latter is language data recorded during social interaction
(e.g. through the Electronically Activated Recorder; EAR;
Mehl & Pennebaker, 2001). Recent studies of online social
networks, such as Twitter and Facebook, have
demonstrated the value of applying tools from fields such
as natural language processing (NLP) and information
retrieval to richly linked and socially situated language
data. Sentiment analysis (SA) of Twitter, for example, has
been used discover opinions regarding new products,
identify regional dialects and retrospectively predict
political movements.
SA uses machine learning
algorithms to train classifiers to distinguish between text
samples grouped according to some attribute (e.g. positive
vs negative opinion, evaluative vs descriptive language,
effective vs ineffective outcome etc.) on the basis of a
selection of linguistic features (i.e. use of certain adjectives,
nouns, 1st person pronouns or private verbs, e.g. think,
feel, like, know). We propose the synergy of this type of
automated language analysis with neuroimaging data
from fMRI studies in which subjects engage in tasks that
involve exposure to ideas, objects, or other socially
relevant stimuli, and then provide a free-form post-scan
language samples expressing preferences, opinions , or
engage in other experimentally relevant social interactions
(alone or in more complex groups).
The resulting
language corpus can then be analyzed using NLP tools to
provide metrics for sentiment, use of descriptive or
interactive language features, and so on, that can be
applied as parameters in the analysis of the fMRI data. To
illustrate this approach we present data from a study
where subjects (n=20) were asked to act as interns for a TV
production company and during a scanning session
viewed ideas for 24 potential shows. After this session
they were videotaped describing and evaluating each
show. Their language was transcribed and given to a
sentiment analysis classifier trained on a corpus of film
reviews, which returned ratings for polarity (neutral vs
polar) and positivity (positive vs negative). Used as
parametric modulators values indicative of more positive
sentiment were associated with activation in neural
regions associated almost exclusively with self-related
processing and social cognition (medial prefrontal cortex;
MPFC, and posterior cingulate/precuneus; PCC), and
memory encoding (Hippocampus) during initial idea
encoding. These results are consistent with more laborintensive ratings made by trained coders who assessed the
enthusiasm expressed by each of the participants about
each show. These data provide novel evidence linking
neural activity during initial idea encoding to the
enthusiasm with which the ideas are subsequently
delivered to others and also demonstrate the novel use of
sophisticated machine learning tools to link natural
language data to neuroimaging data. These results and

	  

methodology also lay the foundation to link basic
neurocognitive signals collected using fMRI to complex
social interactions collected outside of the scanner (e.g.
recorded conversation, expression of preferences or
opinions in more open ended formats), as well as to data
collected through online social media (e.g. Facebook,
Twitter).
D-51
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL POWER ON
EMOTIONAL
PROSODY
RECOGNITION
Silke
Paulmann, Ayse K Uskul, Sarah T. Harris, Lauren King;
University of Essex - The popular saying “it’s not what you
say, it’s how you say it” nicely illustrates the importance
that emotional tone of voice (prosody) plays in our social
interactions. In fact, the ability to accurately identify
others’ emotions is essential in daily-life. Clearly,
difficulties in detecting emotions from the voice can lead
to severe problems in interpersonal communication. Given
emotional prosody’s prominent status in social
communication it is thus essential to explore how a factor
such as social power can impact on its perception. Thus, in
two behavioral studies, we explored the role of social
power in emotional prosody recognition. Specifically, we
will present data from a correlational and an experimental
study in which participants were asked to recognize basic
emotions (anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness,
pleasant surprise) or a neutral tone of voice from
nonsense-speech (“Klaff the frisp dulked lantary”). Results
from the correlational study suggest that the generalized
sense of power is negatively correlated with recognition
accuracy. Results from the experimental study show that
participants in the high power condition show
significantly lower accuracy than those in the low power
condition. These findings indicate that high power is
associated with a reduced level of accuracy in recognizing
emotions in other people’s voice. Importantly, we find
power plays a role in the identification of emotions in
voice, but not when voice does not communicate any
emotion (neutral tone of voice). Based on these findings
we further explored how differences in social power on
emotional prosody recognition manifest at a neural level.
Specifically, a follow-up event-related brain potential
(ERP) study examines how latency and amplitude of ERPs
that have previously been linked to emotional prosody
processing (P200, N300/N400) are modulated by social
power. Similar to the second behavioral experimental
study described above, participants are primed to feel
either powerful or powerless before conducting an
emotional prosody recognition task. Previously, early ERP
components such as the P200 have been linked to
emotional salience detection (e.g. Paulmann & Kotz, 2008),
while later components such as the N300 and N400 have
been linked to more in-depth processing (e.g. meaning) of
emotional vocal stimuli (e.g. Schirmer, Kotz & Friederici,
2002, 2005; Paulmann & Pell, 2010). If emotional prosody
recognition decline for high power individuals is related
to altered emotional salience detection, we expect early
components such as the P200 to differ between high and

41	  

low power participants. However, if differences in later
stages reflecting emotional meaning processes lead to
lower emotional prosody recognition rates in high power
individuals, we expect to find altered later negative ERP
components in those participants when compared to low
power individuals. Taken together, our findings can
inform why some people are less adapt at “reading
between the lines” and will also contribute to the ongoing
and unresolved discussion of the role of power in
interpersonal accuracy on more general terms.

bilateral Precentral Gyrus that is responsible for motor
planning and preparation, and the Inferior Frontal Gyrus,
an area belonging to the putative Mirror Neuron System
that was found to be more active during motor
preparation of complementary than imitative actions.
Secondly, we contrasted the Bid-away with the Motion
away
condition
in
order
to
examine
the
communicativeness in a non-interactive situation. For this
contrast we didn’t find any significant activation. Lastly
we compared the two previous contrasts (Bid-toward Motion-Toward > Bid-away - Motion-away) in order to
see the interaction effect of Communicativeness by
Interactivity. Results provided significant activations in
areas overlapping the ones found active in the Bid-toward
vs. Motion-toward comparison.
The present study
provided evidence that in action comprehension
communicativeness
is
affected
by
interactivity,
demonstrating the existence of a brain network, including
associative and motor areas, specifically responsible for
processing communicative actions directed toward us, but
not for communicative actions directed toward others.

D-52
SPECIFIC BRAIN MECHANISMS UNDERLYING
COMMUNICATIVE ACTIONS COMPREHENSION
Federica Rivar, Yale University, University of Milano-Bicocca;
Brent C. Vander Wyk, Yale University; Kevin Pelphrey, Yale
University - Comprehending actions is a crucial ability to
have successful social interactions. In recent years, several
studies have been carried out aimed at investigating the
neural basis underlying action understanding. Previous
studies have principally focused on relatively noncommunicative actions (e.g. grasping) and have usually
employed non-interactive tasks (passive observation).
However, considering the social extent of action
comprehension, dimensions such as communicativeness
and interactivity need to be taken into account. The aim of
the present study was to investigate brain mechanisms
underlying comprehension of communicative actions in
an interactive situation employing a semi-naturalistic
paradigm by functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI). We compared explicit communicative actions with
simple motion using either an interactive or a noninteractive task. The experiment consisted of a ball tossing
game depicted in a series of interactive video clips. The
movies showed two full-body players performed either a
communicative or a non-communicative action: gesturing
for a ball (Bid, communicative) or a simple up-and-down
arm motion (Motion, non-communicative). Players were
turned either toward the subjects (Interactive, Toward) or
to each other (Non-interactive, Away). Participants were
instructed to press a button to throw the ball to a player of
their choice whenever a toward-condition was presented.
Each condition (Bid-toward, Motion-toward, Bid-away,
and Motion-away) included 24 trials that were presented
in an event-related design. Data from 11 participants (7
females) were collected. Behavioral data revealed a
difference between the -toward conditions providing
evidence that the behavior was influenced by the type of
action presented. Indeed, the number of times participants
threw the ball to the moving player was higher in the Bid
toward than in the Motion-toward condition. Regarding
the functional data we
first
considered the
communicativeness effect in the interactive situation
comparing the Bid-toward with the Motion-Toward
condition. This revealed significant activations in a set of
different brain areas: the right posterior Superior
Temporal Sulcus (pSTS) that is involved in the
comprehension of action goal, the dorsal Prefrontal Cortex
that is implicated in the recognition of action intention, the

	  

D-53
RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN
LOW
LEVEL
PERCEPTUAL DECISION AND SOCIAL HIERCHARY:
A
POSSIBLE
INTERPRETATION
THROUGH
BEHAVIOR, ERPS AND COMPUTATIONAL MODEL
Hernando Santamaría García, Mario Panunnzi, Alba Ayneto,
Gustavo Deco, Nuria Sebastián Gallés - Previous research
shows that social aspects can affect high level neural
processing. Until now it was unclear if social aspects such
as hierarchical rank could influence sensory/ perceptual
cognitive processes in primary areas. We evaluated the
effects of social comparisons with members of a hierarchy
using a basic visual task, which is a priori unaffected by
social aspects. Initially, in a computerized game we
constructed a strong social hierarchy based on the skills on
a visual (Numerosity) task, participants performed the
task comparing their results with two covertly simulated
players, one superior and the other one inferior.
Participants were significantly better and faster when they
performed the task simultaneously with the high status
player. In a follow up experimental procedure we
analyzed the time course of the event related potential
response. Two time windows were studied, analyzing
early perceptual/sensory processes (< 350 ms) and the late
/attentional decisional processes around 350 and 700 ms.
We observed significant hierarchical effects even in the
early stages of sensory - perceptual processing (0 - 350ms);
suggesting early top-down modulations of social aspects.
Those differential neural responses of primary cognitive
processes also translated into differences in behavioural
measures. Furthermore we found specific personality
traits related with performance supporting a possible
explanation about how human beings act in social
comparisons.

42	  

D-54
FUNCTIONAL AND STRUCTURAL CORRELATES OF
SOCIAL INFLUENCE Daniel Campbell-Meiklejohn, NYU,
Aarhus University; Ryota Kanai, University College London;
Bahador Bahrami, University College London; Dominik Bach,
University College London; Raymond Dolan, University
College London; Andreas Roepstorff, Aarhus University; Chris
Frith, University College London - The extent that we are
influenced by expressed values of others is a trait that can
define us or align us in society. The tendency to change
our values to be more or less like values expressed by
others can vary between individuals but is a fairly stable
trait across different contexts. This suggests that social
influence on value may have a stable anatomical correlate.
In a previous study, we found that social influence on
value correlates with functional neural responses to initial
disagreement with others about value and subsequent
influence on reward value processing.
That study
highlighted physiological dynamics of social influence in
the brain but it did not address the structural foundations
that would link social influence to developmental and
evolutionary theory. Lesion research suggests that
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), often unavailable to reliable
functional MRI studies, is causally involved in central
components of social influence on value. Damage to this
region impairs one’s ability to learn from feedback and act
appropriately during social interactions. In the same
healthy 28 subjects as the functional study (15 male, mean
age), we used Volumetric Based Morphometry methods to
search for a linear relationship between grey matter
volume (GM) in the OFC and a tendency to adopt values
expressed by other people. Prior to testing, subjects
provided the names of twenty pieces of popular music
that they would like to own but did not own yet. They
rated each song for desirability on a scale from 1 (low) to
10 (high). Afterward, subjects were told that each song
was heard and reviewed by two music experts that
subjects had rated as reasonably capable of choosing
enjoyable music. Subjects then performed the task. During
a given trial, subjects would indicate their preference
between a song they submitted and an alternative song
they had never heard (subjects almost always chose the
submitted one). Next, they were told which song the
experts preferred. Each submitted song was evaluated by
pairings with 6 different alternatives. After the task,
subjects rated their desire for each submitted song again.
For each subject, change of song desirability was tested for
a linear relationship with net expert preference for the
song (times preferred - times not preferred). The resulting
correlation coefficient provided a measure of tendency to
shift ratings toward or away from opinions of others. Grey
matter of a specific region of lateral orbitofrontal cortex
(lOFC GM) correlated with the tendency of values to shift
towards expressed values of others. This effect was found
in precisely the same region of both brain hemispheres.
lOFC GM also predicted the functional response to
discovering that someone else’s values contrasted with
one’s own, in the middle frontal gyrus – suggesting that
lOFC GM may index feedback sensitivity or feedback

	  

contextualization. We can now report the existence of an
anatomical correlate of susceptibility to social influence
with
considerable
clinical,
developmental
and
evolutionary implications.
D-55
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL INFLUENCES
ON AESTHETIC JUDGMENT FOR ARTWORKS
Seongmin Park, KAIST; Youngjin Jin, KAIST; Chongwook
Chung, KAIST; Jaeseung Jeong, KAIST - Aesthetic judgment
of artworks is likely influenced by aesthetic judgment of
others, but the precise neural mechanism underlying
various social influences (expert and peer reviews;
positive and negative reviews; review and rating) is
unclear. Here we show that 191 female participants
changed their aesthetic judgment of abstract paintings to
conform to aesthetic judgment of both experts and peers.
More significantly, the conflict of initial assessment with
the rating of a social group triggered a subsequent change
in individual’s judgment to conform to the group, which
was found to correlate with changes in neural activity in
areas associated with error monitoring in 25 viewers: an
increase in activity in the rostral cingulate zone (RCZ) and
a decrease in activity in the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC). In contrast, subjective changes in computation of
aesthetic value to conform to expert’s review were
correlated with activities in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC)
and the striatum. In addition, social cognition networks
such as the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) were engaged
when the perspective inferred in a peer review was taken
into account. These results suggest both informative and
normative motives in conforming to others, which is likely
altered by both the prediction of the sources’ judgment
and one’s level of agreement with the cognitive reasons
behind others’ judgments. Our findings provide evidence
that social influence of others’ aesthetic judgments
changes viewer’s perception-based aesthetic judgments,
and that its neural correlates are responsible for
integrating others’ assessments into our own subjective
aesthetic judgment.
D-56
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THEORY OF MIND: EEG
ALPHA DESYNCHRONIZATION Joe Dietzel, University
of California, San Diego; David Liu, University of California,
San Diego - The ability to interpret others’ thoughts and
beliefs in everyday scenarios is known as mentalizing or
theory of mind. Critically, it relies on understanding a
distinction that a belief can be false and separate from
reality (e.g. the belief that you will receive an ipad for
christmas, and the reality that you won’t). Theory of mind
has been investigated with functional neuroimaging for its
neural underpinnings (Mitchell, 2006; Saxe, 2006; Frith &
Frith, 2006). EEG alpha desynchronization is thought to
also be a measure of functional neural activation. The
present study investigates EEG alpha desynchronization
as participants processed the mental states of other people.
In this study, adults (n=28, mean age=21yrs) were
presented with three story types adopted from those used

43	  

in Saxe (2006), which included false-belief stories, physical
person description stories, and nonhuman description
stories. Following each story, participants answered
questions about the story. Throughout the experiment,
EEG data was recorded to be analyzed offline.
Participants were presented with twenty stories per
condition. Overall, participants’ accuracy on the questions
did not vary by condition. We will describe EEG alpha
desynchronization of each condition relative to the resting
baseline at each scalp location. We predict greater EEG
alpha desynchronization to false-belief stories from
electrodes at medial frontal and right posterior scalp
locations.

	  

44	  

Poster Session G

Specifically, the first neural signature was detected after
about 200 ms for goal inferences (Van der Cruyssen et al.,
2009) and 600 ms for trait inferences (Van Duynslaeger et
al., 2007, 2000). This seems to rule out the notion that
spontaneous inferences precede and inform (i.e., provide
input to) intentional inferences. Second, recent fMRI
studies using a between-participants design have
consistently found on overlap between spontaneous and
intentional instructions in core areas of mentalizing. In a
study on trait inferences, Ma et al. (2011) found a
significant overlap in the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ)
and medial prefrontal (mPFC). Importantly, spontaneous
trait inferences significantly recruited only these core
mentalizing areas, whereas intentional trait inferences
additionally recruited other brain areas, which may reflect
thoughts to confirm or validate the spontaneous trait
hunches made initially, in a variety of ways. In another
recent study on person versus situation causes, Kestemont
et al. (2012) found significant overlap in mentalizing areas
including the TPJ and precuneus. Interestingly,
spontaneous inferences increased the activation of the
mPFC, suggesting the operation of the fundamental
attribution bias which was prevented under intentional
instructions. In a study on trait inconsistencies, Ma et al.
(2012) found a significant overlap in the dorsal mPFC, and
also recruitment under both instructions of the dorsal part
of the anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), which is a
domain-general conflict detection area. Taken together,
these results suggest that intentional instructions exert
their influence only after a common (spontaneous) process
produced an initial inference. Specifically, intentional
instructions seem to invite observers to think more deeply
about the material they read, and consider it in more
different and less biased ways to verify the inference made
(e.g., to verify an initial spontaneous inference with more
details as laid down in memories).

G-01
SOCIAL
GOALS
MODULATE
AMYGDALA
RESPONSE TO FACES
Daniel L. Ames, Princeton
University; William A. Cunningham, The Ohio State
University; Alexander A. Todorov, Princeton University- This
work examines flexibility in the brain's evaluative
subsystems as a function of social context.
While
undergoing fMRI scanning, participants read scenarios
describing social goals that involved either helping others
or using others to help the self. After each scenario,
participants viewed a series of faces and selected those
people who looked most relevant to the given social goal.
Scenarios were pretested to make one of four groups of
faces situationally relevant (with face groups varying on
the dimensions of perceived trustworthiness and
perceived dominance). Primary analyses focus on the
amygdala, a subcortical structure that provides arousal
cues that direct attention and facilitate effective responses
to the environment. Results show that the functional
profile of the amygdala varies systematically as a function
of participants' social goals. Specifically, when a given
kind of person (e.g., strong, trustworthy-looking people) is
made situationally relevant (e.g., by asking participants to
select the people whose help they want in moving to a
new apartment), those kinds of faces elicit increased
BOLD response in the amygdala relative when they are
not motivationally relevant. This effect is observed for
both selfish and selfless social goals. In-scanner decisions,
individual difference scales, and independent measures of
selfish/selfless economic decisions are also analyzed and
their respective relationships to BOLD responses in the
amygdala are discussed. This work supports a view of
amygdala function that is highly sensitive to social
context. Moreover, in contrast to theories emphasizing
cognitive control mechanisms in exercising selfless
behavior, this work suggests that ‘low-level’ affective
responses are automatically tuned to facilitate otherfocused goals.

G-03
NEURAL
SYSTEMS
UNDERLYING
THE
FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION ERROR AND ITS
CONSEQUENCES FOR PERSON PERCEPTION Tobias
Brosch, New York University, University of Geneva; Daniela
Schiller, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Rachel
Mojdehbakhsh, New York University; James S. Uleman, New
York University; Elizabeth A. Phelps, New York UniversityWhen making sense of other people, we should consider
both dispositional and situational factors as potential
causes for a behavior. However, people often ignore the
importance of situational factors, a phenomenon known as
the Fundamental Attribution Error (FAE). We investigated
the brain systems underlying information integration
during the attribution process. FAE was associated with
reduced BOLD in DLPFC during the encoding of
situational information, consistent with the failure of a
correctional process that integrates situational information
into attributions. We furthermore investigated the impact
of attributions on evaluations. Behaviorally, attributions
were strongly linked to subsequent evaluations. We
observed a dissociation between brain regions involved in

★

G-02
SPONTANEOUS AND INTENTIONAL SOCIAL
INFERENCES: NEURAL EVIDENCE OF A COMMON
PROCESS Frank Van Overwalle, Vrije Universiteit- Several
lines of social neuroscientific evidence seem to contradict
extant dual-process models which assume that
spontaneous and intentional inferences are guided by
different (associative versus symbolic) processes (De
Neys, 2006; De Neys, Vartanian & Goel, 2008; Smith &
DeCoster, 2000; Uleman, 1999). First, using instructions for
spontaneous (“read carefully”) or intentional (“what is the
goal / trait of this person?”) inferences between
participants (so that leakage of the intentional instructions
into the spontaneous condition was avoided), ERP studies
have documented that the onset of social inferences occurs
at about the same time irrespective of instructions.

	  

45	  

evaluations that integrated situational information and
evaluations based exclusively on behavior, with DMPFC
emerging as potential substrate of the integration of
attributions and evaluations. Our findings demonstrate
how top-down control processes regulate impression
formation when situational information is taken into
account to understand others.

of the information changed on the fourth trial—making
the fourth and fifth trials inconsistent with information
previously learned about that target and necessitating that
participants update their impressions. Across both studies,
we observed a consistent set of regions associated with
updating impressions, including dorsomedial prefrontal
cortex (dmPFC), ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC),
superior temporal sulcus (STS), and inferior parietal
lobule (IPL). Moreover, the magnitude of the change in
dmPFC activity in response to inconsistent information
correlated with the change in participants’ in-scanner
behavioral ratings, suggesting a direct association between
activity in this region and on-line impression updating. In
addition, the second study investigated whether neural
responses vary as a function of the content of the
information. Specifically, we tested for differences in
updating based on morality- vs. ability-related
attributions. Previous behavioral research has shown that
whereas negative information is more diagnostic in the
morality domain, positive information is more diagnostic
in the ability domain. Although we found the same
behavioral pattern of responses, we also found that
bilateral vlPFC and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) were more
strongly associated with updating impressions based
upon diagnostic information, independent of the content
of information. These findings suggest a common neural
basis for the aforementioned negativity and positivity
biases. In sum, these studies identify a functional network
of regions involved in dynamic updating of person
impressions. The responses of these regions seem to be
driven by the diagnostic value of the behavioral
information for the resulting impression.

G-04
BRAIN AREA FOR ENCODING TRAITS: AN FMRI
ADAPTATION STUDY
Ning Ma, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel; Kris Baetens, Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Marie
Vandekerckhove, Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Frank Van
Overwalle,Vrije Universiteit Brussel- Neuroimaging studies
of trait processing have found a network of brain areas,
the critical part of which appears to be medial PreFrontal
Cortex (mPFC). In this study, we investigated whether the
mPFC plays an essential role in the encoding traits by
using fMRI-adaptation, which is a rapid decrease of
stimulus-related neuronal responses upon repeated
presentation of a stimulus. Participants had to infer an
agent’s (social) trait from brief trait-implying behavioral
descriptions. In each trial, the critical (target) sentence was
preceded by prime sentences that implied the same trait
(trait-consistent), the opposite trait (trait-inconsistent), or
no trait at all (trait-irrelevant), or the target sentence was
not preceded by any prime (baseline trait-singleton). The
results revealed robust adaptation effects in the ventral
mPFC in all three prime conditions compared to the
baseline. Crucially, adaptation after trait-consistent and
trait-inconsistent primes was significantly stronger than
after trait-irrelevant primes. This effect was absent in other
brain areas. In line with previous research on fMRI
adaptation, we interpret this finding as indicating that
trait concepts are not only processed, but also encoded in
the ventral mPFC.

G-06
PERCEPTUAL ADAPTATION TO CUTENESS AND
ATTRACTIVENESS Jessica Golle; Fred W. Mast; Janek S.
Lobmaier - In the last decade high-level after-effects have
been reported for many different facial cues. For example,
adaptation to male faces has been found to cause
participants to perceive subsequent faces as more feminine
and vice versa. Here we examined perceptual adaptation
to facial cuteness and attractiveness and its dependency
on the sex and age of the face. Three experiments were
implemented,
each
consisting
of
preadaptation,
adaptation and postadaptation phases. In Experiment 1
twenty-four participants adapted to uncute and cute male
and female baby faces and subsequently rated the
cuteness of male and female baby faces. In Experiment 2
twenty-four participants adapted to cute and uncute baby
faces, their subsequent task being to evaluate the
attractiveness of adult faces. Finally, in Experiment 3
twenty-four participants adapted to sex-specific attractive
and unattractive adult faces and assessed the cuteness of
baby faces and the attractiveness of adult faces. The
results revealed a sex-specific attractiveness after-effect
only for adult faces and a sex-unspecific cuteness aftereffect only for baby faces. These results raise the question
where the concept of cuteness may be localized in the
multidimensional face space. So far, there is no research

G-05
THE NEURAL BASES OF UPDATING IMPRESSIONS
Peter Mende-Siedlecki, Princeton University; Yang Cai,
Princeton University; Sean Baron, Princeton University; Alex
Todorov, Princeton University- As humans, we are faced
with a constant challenge: figuring out the other humans
around us. We form rapid, robust impressions of other
people in service of this challenge, yet impression
formation is a dynamic process. Other people are
continuous sources of data, and in some cases, it becomes
necessary to update our impressions based upon new,
inconsistent information. While there have been several
neuroimaging investigations of initial, behavior-based
impression formation, we sought to explore impression
formation over a longer behavioral trajectory. As such, we
devised two fMRI studies to identify brain regions
involved in updating impressions. In both studies,
participants saw faces paired with valenced behavioral
information and were asked to form impressions of these
targets. Each face was seen five times in a row, each time
with a different piece of behavioral information. Critically,
some of the targets were inconsistent, in that the valence

	  

46	  

concerning the representation of baby faces within the
multidimensional face space.

MOTHER IN CHINESE? Pin-Hao A. Chen, Dartmouth
College; William W. Kelley, Dartmouth College; Katie E.
Powers, Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton, Dartmouth
College- Neuroimaging studies on self-referential
processing have found that the medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) and the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) are
robustly activated during self-reference tasks (Kelley et.
al., 2002; Heatherton et. al., 2006; Moran et. al., 2006; Zhu
et. al., 2009 and Ray et. al., 2010). Furthermore, several
studies have showed that MPFC activates differently for
self and close others (for example, best friends and
mother) in Westerners (Heatherton et. al., 2006 and Zhu et.
al, 2009). One intriguing study found, however, the same
activation pattern in MPFC for self and mother for
Chinese participants, presumably because of the
collectivist nature of their culture (Zhu et. al., 2009). The
current study examined whether the neural representation
of self and close other (mother) is modulated when
Chinese participants shift between two languages in
which they are fluent. Specifically, we examined whether
neural representation of self and mother were different
when people used Chinese (their first language) or English
(their second language). Fifteen newly arrived native
Chinese-speaking graduate students, who were also fluent
in English, were recruited. An event-related fMRI study
with six counterbalanced conditions (self-judgments in
English and Chinese, mother-judgments in English and
Chinese, font-judgments in English and Chinese) was
conducted. A total of 120 Chinese and 120 English trait
words matched for meaning were selected from two
established pools of personality trait words (English
words are from Anderson, 1968, Chinese words are from
Yang & Wang, 1999). In order to examine whether MPFC
engages differently across conditions, we use two ROIs
from two prior studies (Kelley et. al., 2002, 10, 52, 2; BA 10,
and Moran et. al., 2006, -3, 47, 0; BA 10). A 2 (language) by
2 (self/mother) ANOVA showed a significant main effect
of self/mother condition (F [1, 14] = 9.6, P < .01) and
language condition (F [1, 14] = 15.5, P < .005) for the
Moran et al. ROI and a significant main effect in task
condition (F [1, 14] = 9.7, P < .01) and a marginally
significant main effect in language condition (F [1, 14] =
4.3, P = 0.58) for the Kelley et al. ROI. The language effect
is likely due to the cognitive effects of translating. Our
self/mother findings suggest that MPFC differentiates self
from mother for Chinese participants whether they
processed the terms in Chinese or English. This finding
contradicts the prior finding (Zhu et al, 2009) that Chinese
use the same neural representation for self and mother. It
is possible that our participants may differ in meaningful
ways from that study, such as our participants possibly
being more individualistically oriented. Future studies are
needed to clarify whether the neural representation of self
and mother are the same or different in different cultures.

G-07
WHO'S COOLER?: NEURAL CORRELATES OF
SOCIAL COMPARISON JUDGMENTS
William E.
Moore III, University of Oregon; Junaid S. Merchant,
University of Oregon; Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University of OregonSuccessful social interaction requires successful recall and
evaluation of considerable knowledge about the self and
other people, much of which is derived from social
comparisons. Elucidation of the neural mechanisms
associated with this type of interpersonal information
processing is an emerging area of research in social
neuroscience. Most paradigms employed to date have
asked participants to make decisions about abstractly
familiar, but not personally acquainted, others. In this
fMRI study, we asked participants (n = 19) to engage in
social comparison between themselves and several
acquaintances, selected on the basis of high or low selfsimilarity. In the scanner, participants were presented
with a series of trait adjectives (e.g., “cool,” “annoying,”
“outgoing”) and asked to decide, between two pseudorandomly chosen targets, ‘who is more _____’. The four
experimental conditions consisted of comparisons
between: self and a similar peer, self and a distant peer, or
two peers with either high or low self-similarity. Imaging
data were acquired using a predictive acquisition
sequence to correct for head motion, and then
preprocessed in SPM8 including field map correction,
realignment, unwarping, coregistration and normalization
to the MNI-152 template using DARTEL. First level
general linear models were constructed for each
participant, and a random effects analysis was conducted
across subjects using the contrast images derived for each
condition. Differences in reaction time were evident
across conditions, with significant main effects of both
self-involvement
and
similarity
of
comparator.
Neuroimaging results demonstrated that BOLD signal
varied at the inferior frontal junction and in the rostral
anterior cingulate cortex (rACC) as a function of social
decision-making context, with an interaction between selfinvolvement and similarity of comparator. Specifically,
comparisons between the self and a highly similar other
elicit distinct patterns of activity when contrasted against
each other sort of social comparisons, with conjunction
analysis revealing a significant cluster of activity in the
rACC. Parameter estimates of activity in this region also
correlated with independent behavioral measures of selfconstrual, linking individual differences in medial PFC
function during a social cognitive task to individual
differences in self-reported, subjective evaluations of the
self. These results further suggest that different aspects of
interpersonal comparisons rely on distinct neural
substrates.

G-09
THE SELF BEYOND THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX: THE EXTENDED NETWORK FOR SELFAPPRAISALS Junaid S. Merchant, University of Oregon;

G-08
DOES MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ENGAGE
EQUALLY FOR REPRESENTATION OF SELF AND

	  

47	  

Christabelle L. Moore, University of Oregon; Matthew D.
Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles; Andrew J.
Fuligni, University of California, Los Angeles; Chuansheng
Chen, University of California, Irvine; Jennifer H. Pfeifer,
University of Oregon- Neuroimaging studies on selfreferential processing have found that the medial
prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and the posterior cingulate
cortex (PCC) are robustly activated during self-reference
tasks (Kelley et. al., 2002; Heatherton et. al., 2006; Moran
et. al., 2006; Zhu et. al., 2009 and Ray et. al., 2010).
Furthermore, several studies have showed that MPFC
activates differently for self and close others (for example,
best friends and mother) in Westerners (Heatherton et. al.,
2006 and Zhu et. al, 2009). One intriguing study found,
however, the same activation pattern in MPFC for self and
mother for Chinese participants, presumably because of
the collectivist nature of their culture (Zhu et. al., 2009).
The current study examined whether the neural
representation of self and close other (mother) is
modulated when Chinese participants shift between two
languages in which they are fluent. Specifically, we
examined whether neural representation of self and
mother were different when people used Chinese (their
first language) or English (their second language). Fifteen
newly arrived native Chinese-speaking graduate students,
who were also fluent in English, were recruited. An eventrelated fMRI study with six counterbalanced conditions
(self-judgments in English and Chinese, motherjudgments in English and Chinese, font-judgments in
English and Chinese) was conducted. A total of 120
Chinese and 120 English trait words matched for meaning
were selected from two established pools of personality
trait words (English words are from Anderson, 1968,
Chinese words are from Yang & Wang, 1999). In order to
examine whether MPFC engages differently across
conditions, we use two ROIs from two prior studies
(Kelley et. al., 2002, 10, 52, 2; BA 10, and Moran et. al.,
2006, -3, 47, 0; BA 10). A 2 (language) by 2 (self/mother)
ANOVA showed a significant main effect of self/mother
condition (F [1, 14] = 9.6, P < .01) and language condition
(F [1, 14] = 15.5, P < .005) for the Moran et al. ROI and a
significant main effect in task condition (F [1, 14] = 9.7, P <
.01) and a marginally significant main effect in language
condition (F [1, 14] = 4.3, P = 0.58) for the Kelley et al. ROI.
The language effect is likely due to the cognitive effects of
translating. Our self/mother findings suggest that MPFC
differentiates self from mother for Chinese participants
whether they processed the terms in Chinese or English.
This finding contradicts the prior finding (Zhu et al, 2009)
that Chinese use the same neural representation for self
and mother. It is possible that our participants may differ
in meaningful ways from that study, such as our
participants possibly being more individualistically
oriented. Future studies are needed to clarify whether the
neural representation of self and mother are the same or
different in different cultures.‬‬

	  

G-10
THE EVOLUTION OF THE SELF: BODY, AFFECT,
AND EPISODIC MEMORY IN THE SOCIAL ANIMAL
Rami Gabriel, Columbia College; Chicago- I describe self
within its evolutionary history with particular attention to
affect and social habitat. Drawing from affective
neuroscience, cognitive psychology, and philosophy of
mind, my position is that the human self emerged from
the interaction between the mammalian social habitat and
affective motivational processes; that there is an
evolutionarily older self that mediates action tendencies
and primitive affective sentience, which was developed
upon into a second self constituted by identity, whose
function is navigating the social world. William James’s
(1899) influential paradigm of self as known and knower
is conceptually practical but it obscures how sentience
(“I”) evolved from the body (material me) and then – in
social mammals – developed through its social
circumstances (social me) into a practically functional and
predictively useful unit (spiritual self) for the purposes of
social bonding. At its most basic level, the self is a
representation of the body. In social animals, this
primitive action tendency platform evolved a social
identity based on episodic memory. There are two forms
of the self that are manifested on a continuum across
nature. The evolutionarily older self arises from
movement; any creature that moves must have an internal
relation to its environment, which compares goal states, or
innate programs, to its actions and surroundings (Dennett,
1996). This relationship is represented/mediated by
valence in feedback/feedforward loops, which constitute
the most primitive level of sentience. This system becomes
elaborated in proportion to the range of movements,
behaviors, and complexity of the organism. The platform
of valence serves as the relation between motivation and
behavior; it is based in the basic biological regulatory
processes of homeostasis. Homeostasis needs are so
common that brain circuits geared toward their
satisfaction become adaptations. Some midbrain systems
are geared towards basic regulatory functions like eating
and sleeping, while for social animals coordinated
relations with conspecifics are required for survival within
their habitat. These social animals have homeostatic
systems that include social bonding capabilities. I argue
that this homeostasis requirement is satisfied by another
form of self atop the bodily self for the purpose of effective
social bonding. The second form of the self arose from
interaction between social habitat complexity and the
affective bodily motivational platform as an adaptation for
the purposes of providing an effective social unit for
bonding to conspecifics, and as organizational locus for
prediction of behavior and psychology for the organism
itself. The core constituent of this self is Episodic Memory,
a system that evolved to provide an internal platform for
prediction in the form of a set of reliable dispositions
surrounded by specific exceptions (Klein, German,
Cosmides, & Gabriel, 2004). This system provides the basis
for personality – a set of epigenetic behavioral and
psychological dispositions. While fulfilling homeostatic

48	  

social needs, this self also provides the basis for a personal
narrative that gives meaning to our behaviors through
their constitutive relation to our identity within the social
world.

comparisons using the false discovery rate method.
Neural activity in bilateral fusiform cortex and the
superior frontal gyrus increased during SO activation,
while neural activity in the subgenual ACC (sgACC)
decreased. This paradigm is a powerful tool for exploring
the neural basis of social cognition and may well prove
useful in characterizing psychiatric disorders in a
developmentally sophisticated way.

G-11
AN FMRI TASK FOR EXPLORING MEMORY EFFECTS
OF SIGNIFICANT-OTHER ACTIVATION IN SOCIAL
COGNITION Andrew J. Gerber, Columbia University; Kevin
N. Ochsner, Columbia University; Susan M. Andersen, New
York University; Bradley S. Peterson, Columbia University- A
novel functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
paradigm for exploring the neurobiologic basis of a key
aspect of social cognition was developed, adapted from
Andersen’s transference paradigm (Andersen & Chen,
2002). This paradigm captures the extent to which current
memory in relation to a stranger is impacted by activated
knowledge of a significant other (SO). Forty healthy
young adult participants were seen for two separate
sessions and misled to believe that the sessions were
unrelated to one another. In the first, participants listed
descriptive sentences for each of four different important
people in their lives (SOs), chose 20 irrelevant adjectives
about each from a list, and provided descriptive sentences
about 80 famous individuals. In the second session, at
least two months later, participants were shown 20
sentences about each of six different supposed strangers
(“targets”). Unbeknownst to participants, two of the
targets resembled SOs described by the participant in the
initial session (“the experimental targets”), two resembled
SOs described by a different participant (the yokedcontrol), and two were constructed from a random
assortment of sentences the participant listed about
famous individuals (the no-representation control). The
participants were then shown 30 sentences about each
target and asked to rate how likely it was that they were
just exposed to each about that particular target. For
targets resembling SOs, 10 of the 30 sentences (the “lures”)
had, in fact, not been seen previously about the target, but
were from the participant’s own description of the
pertinent SO. Therefore, participants should incorrectly
rate these lures higher when the target resembled their
own SO, as compared to the comparable lures in either
control condition. Functional MRI images were collected
during the entire second session using a GE Signa 3T
whole body scanner. Individual and group level fMRI
analyses were conducted using SPM8. Replicating
Andersen’s findings, the average memory recognition
score was higher for the “lures” in the SO condition (M
=2.69; SD = .61) than for those in the yoked-control
condition (M = 2.55; SD = .65), paired t (39) = 2.01, p = .05).
In fMRI analyses, betas reflected the tendency of neural
activity to increase when SO-relevant targets were
presented during the learning phase and these were used
to produce a second-level contrast map which showed
significant differences in activation during the
presentation of SO-resembling targets, in comparison with
the yoked-control condition. Findings were significant at
the level of p < .05 after correction for multiple

	  

G-13
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SEX DIFFERENCES AND
WOMEN’S
OWN-GENDER
BIAS
IN
FACE
RECOGNITION MEMORY Johanna Lovén, Karolinska
Institutet; Agneta Herlitz, Karolinska Institutet; Natalie Ebner,
University of Florida; Joakim Svärd, Karolinska Institutet;
Håkan Fischer, Stockholm University- Women typically
remember female faces better than male faces, whereas
men show no reliable own-gender bias in memory for
faces. In addition, women are better at remembering faces
than men, and particularly female faces. It has been
suggested that women’s advantage in face recognition
memory is a result of better face processing skills, and
both behavioral and functional findings are in line with
this notion. Women outperform men on perceptual face
identification and recognition tasks, and show higher face
specificity (i.e., volume of face selective activations) than
men in fusiform gyrus while viewing faces compared to
non-face objects. Finally, a positive association has been
observed between fusiform peak activity in response to
faces and performance on facial identification and
recognition memory tasks. In the present event-related
functional magnetic resonance imaging study, 15 women
and 14 men were investigated during incidental encoding
of female and male faces. Focus here was on two brain
regions important for face perception (inferior occipital
gyrus, fusiform gyrus). Based on the findings presented
above, we hypothesized that brain activity in these cortical
regions would be higher in women than in men during
processing of female faces. Second, we hypothesized that
women would show higher brain activity in these regions
during processing of female faces compared to male faces.
Moreover, we assessed whether individual differences in
fusiform activity in response to faces were associated with
face recognition memory performance, and if this relation
was moderated by sex of viewer and face gender.
Functional images were acquired with a 3T scanner.
Participants passively viewed 24 female and 24 male faces
with neutral expressions, one at a time, for 3.5 seconds,
randomly intermixed with 24 low-level control trials.
After a short retention interval, participants completed a
surprise old/new face recognition memory test,
comprising the 48 previously seen faces and 48 distractor
faces. Results will be presented and discussed at the
conference.
G-14
MOTIVATED REASONING AND THE FALSE
CONSENSUS EFFECT: AN FMRI STUDY B. Locke
Welborn, UCLA; Ben Gunter, UCLA; Stephanie Vezich,

49	  

UCLA; Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA- The false consensus
effect (FCE) is a pervasive and relatively recalcitrant
human tendency to presume that others share our
attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors. Expanding on prior
behavioral research, we used functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) to test alternative theoretical
accounts of consensus bias. Motivated reasoning accounts
explain consensus bias primarily as the product of a desire
to see our own attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors as normal,
reasonable, and widely-held. In this way, the social
thinker uses egocentric projection as a means to defend a
positive self-image against the threat of alternative
opinions and viewpoints. In contrast, cognitive availability
accounts privilege the greater accessibility of our own
attitudes, as well as selective exposure to similar/in-group
others who are likely to share our perspectives on the
issues. In order to explore the neural correlates of the false
consensus effect, we investigated the consensus estimates
of undergraduate students on a variety of contemporary
social and political issues. While undergoing functional
magnetic resonance imaging, twenty-eight UCLA students
estimated the attitudes (opposition/support) of the
ordinary UCLA undergraduate on approximately 200
contemporary social and political issues using a 100-point
sliding scale. Based upon a prior behavioral sample of 200
undergraduates, we were able to calculate the error of
participants’ estimates relative to the mean attitude of the
UCLA undergraduate population on each issue. In
conjunction with participants’ own expressed attitudes,
this information allowed us to interrogate behavioral and
neural correlates of variability in consensus bias at both
the trial-by-trial and individual level. During some trials,
participants received “sample information” in the form of
fictitious attitudes purportedly drawn at random from our
previous behavioral sample. In fact, all “sample
information” reflected either a confirmatory attitude
(similar to the participant’s own expressed attitude) or a
disconfirmatory attitude (similar the sample mean from
our larger behavioral study, and dissimilar from the
participant’s own attitude). This manipulation allowed us
to explore the psychological and neural systems involved
in integrating attitudinal information from others into a
coherent estimate of the ordinary individual’s degree of
support or opposition on a given issue. Consensus bias
was elevated during confirmatory trials relative to
estimates generated in the absence of sample information.
Conversely, consensus bias in the presence of
disconfirmatory information was significantly lower than
control.
Across all conditions, consensus bias was
associated with increased hemodynamic activity in dorsal
medial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex (dACC), subgenual ACC, ventral
striatum, and amygdala. Given the important roles
ascribed to these regions in mentalizing, conflict
monitoring, reward and incentive learning, as well as
affective processing generally, these results provide
support for motivated reasoning accounts of the false
consensus effect. In addition, these regions distinguished
between the confirmatory and disconfirmatory conditions,

	  

being more strongly recruited in the former than the latter.
In the disconfirmatory condition, activity in the right
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) was inversely
associated with consensus bias, which may suggest the
implicit or explicit deployment of regulatory resources to
attenuate bias in the presence of disconfirmatory
information.
G-15
USING EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL TO
INDEX AUTOMATIC BELIEF REASONING Joe Dietzel,
University of California, San Diego; David Liu, University of
California, San Diego- The ability to interpret others’
thoughts and beliefs during everyday interactions is
known as mentalizing, or theory of mind. Theory of mind
is thought to be so pivotal to social interaction that some
consider its detriment to underlie autism or other social
disorders. Nevertheless, despite accounts of mentalizing
playing a central role in everyday social interaction and
communication, little is known about the conditions in
which people actually reason about others’ mental states
and actions (Apperly et al., 2006; Cohen & German, 2009).
Do people reason about mental states and actions only
when overtly instructed to do so, or is this a process that
becomes automatically engaged when presented with
relevant cues? The present studies use ERP to covertly
detect when subjects are ‘caught’ automatically tracking
beliefs while performing a spatial task. In study 1, adults
(n=21) watched animations where a person enters a room,
places an animal in one of two boxes, and then leaves.
While the person is outside the room, the animal hops out
of the box and across the room into the opposite box. The
person then reenters the room now having a false-belief
about where the animal is located (i.e. they believe the
animal is where they placed it, even thought it is actually
in the box which it hopped into). The person begins to
walk in to the room and finally is shown standing behind
one of the two boxes: either the box the animal was place
in, or the box the animal moved to. Eighty percent of the
time, the person will go to the box where they left the
animal. Twenty percent of those times, target trials, the
subject will have to make a response indicating the person
ended standing behind the box on the right side. Twenty
percent of the time the person is expected to end up
behind the box on the right side, if their beliefs are being
tracked, but will instead end up behind the box on the left
side, behaving in a way that violates their beliefs. We
compared the ERP response from these belief-violation
trials to the ERP response from trials that took place on the
same side, did not elicit a subject response, and most
importantly were belief-consistent. We discovered a P3a
component maximally toward the anterior channels FCz
and Fz due to subjects automatically tracking the person’s
belief and noticing when their behavior violates that
belief. We also compared the ERP response of the target
trials to the remaining belief-consistent trials. A classic
P3b component located maximally in the posterior
channels Pz and POz was observed here, similar to
previous results found in the classic oddball paradigm

50	  

literature. In study 2, the animations were modified to test
if subjects (n=23) automatically detect behavior that
violates a person’s true-belief. ERP results were similar to
the false-belief study.

K. Barbey, Decision Neuroscience Laboratory, Beckman
Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, Neuroscience
Program, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Frank
Krueger, National Institutes of Health, George Mason
University; Jeffrey Solomon, Medical Numerics, Inc.; Robert H.
Lipsky, Inova Fairfax Hospital; Colin A. Hodgkinson, National
Institutes of Health; David Goldman, National Institutes of
Health; Jordan Grafman, National Institutes of Health- This
study examined the role of orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) plasticity in
controlling implicit and explicit social biases. Normal
controls and patients with varied OFC and DLPFC lesion
size and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene, which
promotes (methionine-valine [Met/Val] SNP) or stifles
(valine-valine [Val/Val] SNP) plasticity in damaged PFC
regions, completed measures of implicit and explicit social
bias. Patients and controls demonstrated comparable
levels of implicit bias, but patients with Met/Val SNPs
exhibited less implicit bias when they had smaller OFC
lesions compared with Val/Val patients with similar size
lesions and those with large OFC lesions. Both patients
and controls demonstrated patterns of explicit bias
consistent with hypotheses. Patients with Met/Val SNPs
exhibited less explicit bias when they had smaller DLPFC
lesions sizes compared with Val/Val patients with similar
size lesions and those with large DLPFC lesions. OFC
lesion size and BDNF SNP type did not moderate explicit
bias; DLPFC lesion size and BDNF SNP type did not
moderate implicit bias (nor did other medial or lateral
regions). Findings suggest that plasticity within specific
PFC regions modulates the type and degree of social bias
that individuals’ exhibit.

G-17
NEURAL BASIS OF THE IDENTIFIABLE VICTIM
EFFECT Alexander Genevsky, Stanford University; Daniel
Vastfjall, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden; Paul
Slovic, Decision Research, Eugene Oregon; Brian Knutson,
Stanford University- Introduction: The identifiable victim
effect describes the fact that people are more willing to
help individuals with identifiable information than those
who remain anonymous. Previous behavioral research
demonstrated that subjects donated more often and at
greater magnitudes to orphans when they saw their
photograph versus a silhouette.
Further, evidence
suggests that this effect might be related to the affective
impact of the photograph. To further understand the role
of affect in this manipulation, we ran an FMRI study on 16
individuals. Methods: Prior to scanning, subjects were
given a monetary endowment from which they could
choose to donate or not on each trial of the experiment
(one of which would be randomly selected to count "for
real" at the conclusion the session). While being scanned,
during each trial subjects first saw either a photo or
silhouette of an African orphan, accompanied with a name
(4 sec). They then saw an amount for the requested
donation (2 sec). Finally, two boxes (presented in a
counterbalanced fashion on the left and right sides of the
screen) presented "yes" and "no" options, allowing subjects
to choose whether or not to donate (4 sec), followed by a
2-6 sec variable intertrial interval. Results: Analyses of a
priori ROIs selected from previous research on reward
processing and charitable giving indicate differential
activation for face vs. silhouette stimuli in the amygdala,
insula and nucleus accumbens. Insular and amygdalar
activity was negatively correlated with decisions to give.
Further, the nucleus accumbens was differentially
activated in give vs no-give trials. Discussion: Current
findings suggest that presentation of faces versus
silhouettes robustly activates brain regions implicated in
facial identification, incentive processing, and affective
processing of both positive and negative arousal.
Together, this activity may compel people to give to others
based on identifiable and affectively compelling
characteristics,
even
at
their
own
expense.
Acknowledgements: Stanford Center for Cognitive and
Neurobiological Imaging, Stanford Center for Compassion
and Altruism Research and Education.

G-19
SOUP FOR THE MIND: SOCIAL INTERACTION
WITH EXTREME OUT-GROUP MEMBERS DISRUPTS
DEHUMANIZED PERCEPTION Alexandra Cohen, Duke
Institute for Brain Sciences; Lasana T. Harris, Duke Institute
for Brain Sciences, Duke University- Social neuroscience
research demonstrates that extreme out-group members,
such as the homeless, suffer dehumanized perception—
people fail to spontaneously infer their mental states. The
neural correlates of dehumanized perception in response
to images of extreme out-group members like the
homeless consist of less activity in the social cognition
network—including parts of medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) and temporal lobe—along with increased activity
in the amygdala and insula, subcortical regions implicated
in social bias and disgust (Harris & Fiske, 2006). Although
the reduced social cognition network response is
malleable in the context of preference inferences when
viewing the pictures (Harris & Fiske, 2007), the present
study aims to explore if actual real life encounters and
social interactions can have a similar effect. Social
interaction is an integral part of everyday life. However,
we may not regularly have the opportunity to interact
with individuals in extreme out-groups—spontaneous
disgust responses and dehumanized perception encourage

★

G-18
BDNF POLYMORPHISM--DEPENDENT OFC AND
DLPFC PLASTICITY DIFFERENTIALLY MODERATES
IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT BIAS Chad E. Forbes, Clinical
Center and National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, University of
Delaware; Joshua C. Poore, National Institutes of Health; Aron

	  

51	  

avoiding them all together. In the current study, we adopt
a clinical intervention paradigm for use with functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to examine brain
activity of participants in response to the homeless before
and after either actively engaging in conversations with
homeless individuals at a soup kitchen. We find increased
spontaneous mental state inferences after social
interaction, and modulation of the social cognition
network and amygdala-prefrontal cortical circuitry by
social experience. This suggests malleability of neural
circuits implicated in the worst kind of prejudice by social
experience.

G-21
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL ANALYSIS OF
MIXED-RACE GROUP MEMBERSHIP
Holly Earls,
University of Virginia; James P. Morris, University of VirginiaIt has long been known that people are better at
recognizing faces of their own race relative to other-race
faces (see Meissner & Brigham, 2001 for a review). There
has also been neural evidence of differential processing of
own- and other-race faces (e.g. Golby, Gabrieli, Chiao &
Eberhardt, 2001). Although it was proposed that this
recognition bias was due to greater experience with ownrace faces, recent evidence has shown an in-group
recognition bias for arbitrary groups even when prior
exposure is equated (Bernstein, Young & Hugenberg,
2007).
Van Bavel, Packer, and Cunningham (2008)
assessed the neural substrates of group membership by
arbitrarily assigning participants to novel mixed-race
groups and measuring brain activation using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The authors found
many brain areas showing greater activation when
processing in-group relative to out-group faces, regardless
of race. These findings suggest that the differential brain
activation typically associated with own- versus other-race
faces could be due to group membership cues rather than
perceptual differences associated with race. The current
study adopted Van Bavel and colleagues’ paradigm using
electroencephalography (EEG) to measure event-related
potentials (ERPs). Additionally, a baseline measurement
of brain activation was obtained while processing mixedrace faces prior to learning team membership. By using
ERPs, we were able to examine the time course of
processing mixed-race faces both prior to and after
learning the group membership affiliation of the target
individuals. Results indicated that prior to the group
manipulation, differences were seen in the N170 and P300
components based on the race of the target face. These
components are associated with facial processing and
attention, respectively (Luck, 2005). After learning group
membership, differences in the N170 component were
again shown for race at multiple electrodes, but were only
significantly different based on group affiliation at one
electrode site. Differences in brain activation based on
group affiliation emerged in the P300 component. These
results suggest that although group membership can
impact the processing of target individuals, group
membership does not completely override the effects of
race.

G-20
THE EFFECTS OF STEREOTYPICAL EXPECTANCY
VIOLATIONS ON EARLY ATTENTION TO RACE
Cheryl L. Dickter, College of William and Mary; Ivo I.
Gyurovski, University of Chicago- Previous research has
demonstrated that early attentional components of the
event-related potential (ERP) reflect differential attention
to race during person
perception.
Additional
psychophysiological work has shown that inconsistency
between stereotypic information following impression
formation leads to greater neural processing in later ERP
components. However, research has not examined how
expectancy violations following impression formation
affect the early attentional processing of race. Twenty-five
White undergraduates performed a novel impression
formation task while EEG was recorded. The task
involved the presentation of pilot-tested sentences in
which a target individual was described to perform
behaviors associated with positive or negative stereotypes
about Blacks and Whites, with the purpose of creating an
expectation of Black or White targets. Following each
impression formation sentence, a male face whose race
either violated or confirmed this expectancy was
displayed. Participants indicated whether this target could
have performed the previous behavior. Results
demonstrated that early attentional components of the
ERP varied as a function of the match between expectancy
and the race of target faces, with stereotypic expectancy
violating trials yielding greater N1 and N2 amplitudes
than expectancy confirming trials. P2 amplitude to the
target faces was also moderated by the stereotypic
impression formed. Additionally, results indicated that N1
amplitude was only affected by the compatibility of
impression valence with the race of the target face, while
participants were sensitive to the compatibility of the
impression stereotypes with target race in the P2 and N2
components. Taken together, the results of the current
study provide compelling evidence that attention to race
early in processing as indexed by early attentional ERP
components is moderated by the consistency of
stereotypic information presented during impression
formation. These findings have important implications for
person perception.

	  

G-22
REPRESENTATION
OF
VALUE
VS.
TRAIT
INFORMATION
IN
INTERGROUP
SOCIAL
JUDGMENTS: DISTINCT ROLES OF ANTERIOR
TEMPORAL LOBE AND PREFRONTAL CORTEX Sam
J. Gilbert, University College London; Jillian Swencionis, New
York University; David, M. Amodio, New York UniversityWhen interacting with a member of a social outgroup,
people’s responses are often influenced by implicit
stereotypic and evaluative associations. Behavioral results
suggest that stereotypes and evaluative biases may

52	  

operate independently of one another, raising the
possibility that they may be mediated by distinct brain
systems.
We investigated this using fMRI. White
participants classified pairs of Black or White faces either
according to a friendship judgment (which of these two
people would you be more likely to befriend?) or a trait
judgment (which of these two people is more likely to be
athletic?). These judgments encouraged the expression of
evaluative bias and stereotypical associations towards
Black faces, respectively. Using multi-voxel pattern
analysis (MVPA), we found that a predominantly occipital
network represented the race of faces in a contextinvariant manner. However, lateral orbitofrontal cortex
preferentially represented race during friendship
judgments whereas anterior medial prefrontal cortex
preferentially represented race during trait judgments.
Furthermore, representation of race in left temporal pole
correlated with a behavioral measure of evaluative bias
during friendship judgments and, independently, a
behavioral measure of stereotyping during trait
judgments. These results indicate a highly contextdependent representation of race in left temporal pole.
Whereas early sensory regions represent race in an
apparently invariant manner, representations of race in
higher-level brain regions are multi-componential and
potentially mutable.

faces. This finding highlights the powerful influence that
stereotypes have on even the earliest components of
person perception and points to a potential mechanism
through which stereotypes affect downstream impressions
and behaviors.
G-24
EXPECTANCY MODULATES THE EXPRESSION OF
IMPLICIT
RACIAL
BIAS:
EVIDENCE
FROM
FRONTAL CORTICAL ACTIVITY AND THE P2 ERP
Jillian K. Swencionis, Princeton University; David M. Amodio,
New York University- Can a more careful response strategy
override the influence of implicit racial bias on behavior?
Our prior research shows that expectancy of greater task
difficulty is associated with decreased expression of
implicit racial bias. Here, we tested whether expectancy is
associated with proactive control, as indicated by greater
relative left frontal cortical activity measured using EEG,
and a shift in early attention to racial cues, as measured by
the P2 ERP component. Participants categorized pleasant
vs. unpleasant words following White or Black face
primes. Expectancy was manipulated by changing the
proportion of trials within each block that were
incongruent with prevailing racial associations. Task
behavior replicated our past findings: in congruent blocks,
the typical pattern of racial bias was observed, but in
incongruent blocks, race did not influence behavior. We
also observed increased left-frontal cortical activity and an
attenuated difference in the P2 ERP component between
Black and White trials during incongruent vs. congruent
blocks. These findings suggest that expectancy is
associated with a reduction in implicit bias, and also that
expectancy may engage greater proactive control and
reduced attention to task-irrelevant race primes.

G-23
STEREOTYPES
FACILITATE
THE
VISUAL
PROCESSING OF BLACK FACES: EVIDENCE FROM
THE N170 EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL Amy R.
Krosch, New York University; David M. Amodio, New York
University- Stereotypes have been shown to shape a
perceiver's impressions and behaviors toward members of
the stereotyped group. But can they also shape the early
visual processing of a stereotyped person’s face? In
research designed to test this question, we hypothesized
that stereotypes facilitate perception of stereotype-relevant
faces. Specifically, we predicted that when primed with
objects related to the stereotype of Blacks as dangerous
(guns), participants would exhibit enhanced encoding of
degraded Black faces vs. White faces, as indicated by the
N170 component of event-related potential (ERP),
compared with stereotype-unrelated primes. ERPs were
recorded while participants categorized a series of slightly
degraded Black and White faces, houses, cars and chairs
as either a “Face” or an “Object”. Just before each of these
targets appeared, a prime image of either a gun or a tool
was presented briefly. As predicted, the N170 amplitude
was larger to Black than White faces when participants
had been primed with guns, but did not differ when they
were primed with tools. Furthermore, differences in N170
amplitude to Black and White faces following gun primes
was related to the difference in the speed at which
participants categorized these faces; participants
exhibiting higher N170 amplitude to Black (vs. White)
faces categorized Black (vs. White) faces faster. This
suggests that stereotype primes enhanced encoding of
faces, facilitating participants’ ability to categorize them as

	  

G-25
THE EFFECTS OF STEREOTYPIC PRIMES ON THE
ATTENTIONAL
PROCESSING
OF
RACIALLY
AMBIGUOUS FACES Julie A. Kittel, College of William and
Mary; Cheryl L. Dickter, College of William and MaryResearch has demonstrated that attention to race varies
based on the race of the target and the perceiver, and is
moderated by contextual information. This study aimed to
determine how stereotype activation affects the early
attentional processing of racially ambiguous faces in Black
and White participants. Another goal of this study was to
examine how this early attentional processing is
moderated by individual differences. Participants saw
positive and negative racial stereotypic primes followed
by unambiguous monoracial or racially ambiguous faces.
Participants categorized the race of the target while EEG
data were collected. After the categorization task,
participants completed the Need for Closure scale and an
index of familiarity with racial outgroup members. Results
indicated that White participants showed evidence of
greater attention, as indexed by larger amplitudes in the
P200 ERP component, to racially ambiguous targets
preceded by Black relative to White stereotypes. White
participants also showed greater attention to racially

53	  

ambiguous targets preceded by negative compared to
positive stereotypes. Black participants, however, did not
show these effects. These findings indicate that the
processing of racially ambiguous target faces is affected by
the context in which those faces are viewed, but that racial
minority group members may not be affected by
contextual information. To examine the moderating
effects of individual differences, bias scores were
calculated for the P200 and P300 components by
subtracting the amplitude when responding to a racially
ambiguous face preceded by a Black stereotype prime
from the amplitude when responding to a racially
ambiguous target preceded by a White stereotype prime.
There was a significant positive correlation between P200
and P300 bias scores and the ambiguity subscale of the
Need for Closure measure. This finding suggests that
participants with a lower tolerance for ambiguity showed
a greater sensitivity to the effects of the stereotypes on
their attentional processing. Furthermore, regression
results indicated that this trend was stronger for Black
participants than for White participants. White
participants also showed a significant positive correlation
between childhood contact with racial outgroup members
and the P300 bias score. Taken together, the results of this
study provide insight into how the neural processing of
racially ambiguous individuals may be moderated by
stereotypic information differently for individuals varying
in race and other individual differences.

smaller amplitudes to Black faces that were later forgotten,
relative to subsequently remembered and forgotten White
faces. These findings suggest that the N170 and ORE are
related, and more specifically that early neural responses
can differentially influence subsequent short-term
memory for faces depending upon their race when
processed at the subordinate level.
G-27
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY
BETWEEN
AMYGDALA AND FACIAL REGIONS INVOLVED IN
RECOGNITION OF FACIAL THREAT
Motohide
Miyahara, National Institute for Physiological Sciences,
Okazaki, University of Otago; Tokiko Harada, Nagoya
University; Ted Ruffman, University of Otago; Norihiro
Sadato, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki;
Tetsuya Iidaka, Nagoya University- The recognition of
threatening faces is important for making social
judgments. For example, threatening facial features of
defendants could affect the decisions of jurors during a
trial. Previous neuroimaging studies using faces of
members of the general public have identified a pivotal
role of the amygdala in perceiving threat. This functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study used face
photographs of male prisoners who had been convicted of
first-degree murder (MUR) as threatening facial stimuli.
We compared the subjective ratings of MUR faces with
those of control (CON) faces, and examined how they
were related to brain activation, particularly the
modulation of the functional connectivity between the
amygdala and other brain regions. The MUR faces were
perceived to be more threatening than the CON faces. The
bilateral amygdala was shown to respond to both MUR
and CON faces, but subtraction analysis revealed no
significant difference between the two. Functional
connectivity analysis indicated that the extent of
connectivity between the left amygdala and the facerelated regions (i.e., the superior temporal sulcus, inferior
temporal gyrus and fusiform gyrus) was correlated with
the subjective threat rating for the faces. We have
demonstrated that the functional connectivity is
modulated by vigilance for threatening facial features.

G-26
STRUCTURAL FACE ENCODING AND THE OTHERRACE EFFECT:
HOW DIFFERENCES IN EARLY
PROCESSING AFFECT MEMORY FOR OWN- AND
OTHER-RACE FACES Keith B. Senholzi, University of
Colorado Boulder; Tiffany A. Ito, University of Colorado
Boulder- The other-race effect (ORE) refers to a robust
tendency for people to better remember and recognize
own- as compared to other-race faces. This effect is
assumed to result from superior encoding of ingroup
relative to outgroup faces. An ERP component that is
likely related to the ORE is the N170, a face-specific
component that is larger to human faces than to objects
and nonhuman faces. Its amplitude has been linked to the
structural encoding of faces, but has also been shown to
differ as a function of face race. Given that the ORE is
thought to result from differential ingroup and outgroup
processing during encoding, and the N170 is thought to
index the structural encoding of faces, N170 amplitude
may relate to subsequent memory for own- and other-race
faces. More specifically, increased N170 responses to
outgroup faces may reflect increased recruitment of
structural encoding, which in turn should predict better
memory. To empirically address this question, ERPs were
recorded while White participants viewed Black and
White faces and were required to remember them based
upon their race or unique identity. N170 amplitudes to
Black and White faces varied as a function of subsequent
memory when encoded at the level of identity, with bigger
amplitudes to Black faces that were later remembered and

	  

G-28
THE POWER OF PHYSIOGNOMY: A PERCEPTUAL
ADVANTAGE FOR UNTRUSTWORTHY FACES
Elizabeth Klobusicky, Temple University; Kevin C. Dieter,
University of Rochester; Ingrid R. Olson, Temple UniversityThe faces of members of our own species are one of the
most salient classes of stimuli for human beings because
they carry a wealth of information critical for social
interaction. A useful paradigm for investigating the
relative salience of various visual stimuli is binocular
rivalry, in which disparate images are presented to the left
and right eyes, creating competition for conscious
awareness. During rivalry, a more salient image will rise
to awareness for longer periods of time than a less salient
image (Levelt, 1968). Indeed, one long-standing finding is
the tendency of faces to dominate over other types of

54	  

visual stimuli even when low-level visual factors are
controlled for. Recently, it has been suggested that
behavioral relevance is a key component in promoting the
relative predominance of an image in binocular rivalry
(Dieter & Tadin, 2011). For example, it was shown that
faces associated with negative gossip tend to dominate
awareness for longer durations than those associated with
positive or neutral gossip in a binocular rivalry paradigm
(Anderson et al., 2011). In this case, the behavioral
relevance of individual faces was modified through
associative learning of face-fact pairs. In contrast, our
present study manipulated behavioral relevance by
varying physiognomic features of trustworthiness
(Oosterhof & Todorov, 2008). We hypothesized that
perceptually untrustworthy faces would dominate visual
awareness due to humans’ evolved sensitivity to social
threat. In the present study, participants viewed
competing face and house images presented separately to
each eye through a stereoscope. Here, three sets of face
images (trustworthy, untrustworthy, and neutral;
Oosterhof & Todorov, 2008) were compared against an
identical set of house images. Participants recorded their
percepts as they occurred via key press. Preliminary
results support our hypothesis, demonstrating that
untrustworthy, but not trustworthy, faces dominate visual
awareness. These findings suggest that sensitivity to social
threat, even when inferred from physiognomic features
alone, can alter basic visual processing in humans.
References: Anderson, E., Siegel, E., Bliss-Moreau, E., &
Feldman Barrett, L. (2011). The visual impact of gossip.
Science, 332(6036), 1446-1448. Dieter, K.C., & Tadin, D.
(2011). Understanding attentional modulation of binocular
rivalry: A framework based on biased competition.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 5:155. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2011.00155
Levelt, W.J.M. (1968). On
binocular rivalry. Paris, Mouton. Oosterhof, N. N., &
Todorov, A. (2008). The functional basis of face evaluation.
PNAS, 105(32), 11087-11092

to brain damaged and normal comparison participants.
Here, we put the FTT to a crucial empirical test by giving
prefrontal patients novel beliefs in the laboratory and
directly measuring their ability to falsify (or doubt) those
beliefs. Participants were given four stories presented
sentence by sentence on a computer screen and read the
stories aloud. Within each story, a series of explicitly
labeled false statements about the protagonist were
presented. The explicitly labeled false statements were
designed to sway the dispositional opinion of protagonist,
if mistakenly believed. After each story, participants
judged the protagonist on the critical attribute and
performed a recognition memory test for statements in the
story. The results show that patients with ventromedial
prefrontal cortex damage (vmPFC) tend to misremember
more explicitly-labeled false information as true than
comparison subjects. Moreover, this failure to falsify truly
constitutes a belief, as the explicitly-labeled false
information swayed vmPFC patients’ dispositional
judgments of the protagonist in the designed direction.
This is the first study to offer direct evidence that the
prefrontal cortex is critical in the psychological process of
doubt. The results are in accord with our FTT. Damage to
the vmPFC results in an inability to falsify information
that is patently false; and these inappropriate beliefs are
often used to perform consequential social behavior.
These findings indicate that a neural mechanism of
credulity and gullibility is disruption in the false tagging
mechanism, which is often accompanied by dysfunction
or faulty development of the prefrontal cortex.
G-30
AGE DIFFERENCES IN BOLD ACTIVITY RELATED
TO JUDGMENTS OF TRUST Liz Castle, UCLA; Naomi
Eisenberger, UCLA; Shelley Taylor, UCLA- This study aimed
to identify whether elderly populations show neural
differences in trust perception when compared to younger
controls, with an eye towards explaining the elderly
population’s vulnerability to fraud. Previous research has
shown that older adults are disproportionately vulnerable
to fraud, and age differences in how cues of
trustworthiness are processed may partly underlie this
effect. To address these questions, 23 older adults (aged
55-80, Mean = 66.39) and 21 younger adults (aged 23-46,
Mean 33.24) performed a previously validated trust
perception task (Winston et al., 2002) during fMRI
scanning. Subjects viewed grayscale images of 60 gazeforward neutral facial expressions from both male and
female faces of an array of ethnicities, presented in an
event-related design with a variable ISI fixation displayed
between each stimulus. Faces were selected to represent
three
normed
levels
of
trustworthiness:
low
(untrustworthy), medium (neutral-trust), and high
(trustworthy). There were two runs: a target task run
where subjects were asked to make a binary
trustworthiness judgment (is this person trustworthy or
untrustworthy?), and a control task run where subjects
were asked to make a binary gender judgment (is this
person male or female?). As hypothesized, we found

★

G-29
DAMAGE TO THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX INCREASES CREDULITY TO EXPLICITLYLABELED FALSE INFORMATION Erik Asp, University
of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics; Daniel Tranel, University of
Iowa Hospitals and Clinics- Recent theoretical and empirical
work has indicated that the prefrontal cortex is critical for
the psychological process of doubting cognitive
representations that are inexorably and initially believed.
We have developed the False Tagging Theory (FTT),
which proposes that the prefrontal cortex is necessary for
somatic “false tags” in the psychological process of doubt.
We hypothesize that damage to the prefrontal cortex leads
to a disrupted false tagging mechanism and a “doubt
deficit,” which is accompanied by a tendency toward
belief and credulity.
Early empirical evidence
corroborates the FTT as prefrontal patients tend to have
higher social beliefs (and reduced doubt toward these
beliefs), such as religious and prejudicial beliefs, relative

	  

55	  

bilateral amygdala activation across tasks for all levels of
trustworthiness, implicating the amygdala in implicit
perceptions of trust (p<0.001, cluster threshold 25 voxels).
This finding corroborates previous research implicating
the amygdala in obligatory threat-related processing
(Whalen et al., 1998; Strange et al., 2000; Vuilleumeir et al.,
2001). We also found evidence that suggests that there are
age-related differences in right insula. When examining
the main effect of task, we found that the right insula was
significantly activated across both groups when subjects
were making trust judgments as compared to gender
judgments (p<0.001, cluster threshold 25 voxels).
However, when probed for group differences, this effect
seemed to be driven by our younger subjects. Using a ROI
analysis to investigate the interaction between age group
and trustworthiness level, we found that the right insula
only responded to untrustworthy and trust-neutral faces
(but not trustworthy faces) in the young subjects, and
none of the trustworthiness levels reached significance in
the older subjects. One suggested function for the insula is
that of processing autonomic changes as they affect the
body, which might form the basis of ‘gut feelings’
(Damasio, 1999; Critchley et al., 2001). Related to this, the
right insula has also been implicated in the representation
of risk (Knutson & Bossaerts, 2007), and linked to riskavoidance behavior (Paulus et al., 2003). Following this
interpretation, both groups might be acknowledging
potential for risk while making trust judgments but not
gender judgments, an effect that is not only significantly
amplified in younger subjects, but is preferentially
implemented in untrustworthy and neutral conditions. In
other words, it is possible that a diminished ‘gut instinct’
in older folks hinders their ability to identify
untrustworthy faces and consequently avoid risk.

further classified using a clinical course specifier to
characterize whether their attenuated positive symptoms
worsened (n=49), remitted (n=18), or remained stable
(n=28) during the 12 months following a baseline fMRI
scan. Participants performed an emotional faces fMRI
task, during which they judged which of two linguistic
labels best identified a target facial expression (Emotion
Labeling) or which of two faces expressed the same
emotion as a target face (Emotion Matching). Additional
control conditions allowed for isolation of unique effects
of emotion processing. Analyses primarily focused on
emotion matching, which has elicited robust amygdala
activation among healthy adults in prior work (Lieberman
et al., 2007). Among CHR patients, comparisons between
subgroups revealed differences in amygdala reactivity
that related to subsequent clinical course. Specifically,
CHR patients whose symptoms later remitted over the
course of the next year exhibited increased amygdala
activation during emotion matching at baseline, relative to
CHR patients whose symptoms remained stable (z=4.59,
p<.0001, corrected), CHR patients whose symptoms
worsened (i.e., progression of the prodromal state)
(z=4.19, p<.01, corrected), and controls (z=3.48, p<.01,
corrected). There were no significant differences in
amygdala activation between controls, CHR patients
whose symptoms progressed, and CHR patients whose
symptoms remained stable. Our findings demonstrated
increased amygdala reactivity among patients whose
clinical presentation improves. It may be that heightened
amygdala activation serves a compensatory function
among patients whose symptoms later remit. Moreover,
baseline measures of amygdala function may aid in
predicting future changes in symptomatology related to
the onset of psychosis. Longitudinal imaging data will be
critical to better understanding developmental trajectories
of amygdala function in CHR individuals and how they
might relate to clinical outcomes such as conversion to
psychosis.

G-31
AMYGDALA REACTIVITY AND ITS RELATIONSHIP
WITH CLINICAL COURSE IN ADOLESCENTS AT
CLINICAL HIGH RISK FOR PSYCHOSIS Dylan G. Gee,
UCLA; Sarah Jacobson, UCLA; Jean Addington, University of
Calgary; Scott W. Woods, Yale University; Matthew D.
Lieberman, UCLA; Tyrone D. Cannon, UCLA; on behalf of the
NAPLS Consortium - Patients with schizophrenia exhibit
alterations in the neural circuitry subserving emotion
processing, which may underlie core emotion-related
features of the disorder (e.g., Kohler et al., 2009). For
example, prior work has demonstrated that patients with
schizophrenia display hypoactive amygdala activation
while matching emotional faces (Fakra et al., 2008).
However, the extent to which such deficits are present
prior to the onset of overt psychosis, and the role that they
might play in its development, remain unclear. The
present study aimed to examine amygdala function and
its relationship with subsequent clinical outcomes among
adolescents at clinical high risk (CHR) for psychosis.
Participants consisted of CHR adolescents (n=95) and
typically developing controls (n=54) recruited as part of
the multisite North American Prodrome Longitudinal
Study (NAPLS). Individuals in the CHR group were

	  

G-32
OXYTOCIN'S IMPACT ON BRAIN FUNCTION IN
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS
Ilanit Gordon, Yale University; Randi H. Bennett, Yale
University; Brent C. Vander-Wyk, Yale University; James F.
Leckman, Yale University; Ruth Feldman, Bar-Ilan University;
Kevin A. Pelphrey, Yale University- Social dysfunction is a
core deficit in individuals with Autism Spectrum
Disorders (ASD) and yet the underlying neural
mechanisms remain unclear. Novel avenues of
translational research come from recent discoveries
regarding the effects of the neuropeptide Oxytocin (OT)
on a wide range of social behaviors in humans, especially
increased sociability, empathy and theory-of-mind.
Additionally, variations in the OT receptor gene (OXTR)
have been linked to ASD in several studies. Considering
the known social deficits in ASD, it is important to seek a
deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying OT's
effects using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). This study aims to identify the impact of OT on

56	  

brain regions linked to social motivation, social
perception, and social cognition. We hypothesize that on
fMRI tasks requiring processing of social information, OT
administration will result in increased activity in regions
who play a key role in reward circuitry (such as the
striatum, caudate and nucleus accumbens) as well as key
nodes of the social brain (specifically, the anterior
cingulated and prefrontal cortex, superior temporal
sulcus, amygdale). We also expect increased connectivity
between these brain regions due to OT’s impact. We are
currently performing a double blind, crossover, and
randomized controlled study, in which 20 children and
adolescents (ages 7-18) with ASD are randomly assigned
to OT and placebo nasal sprays on two consecutive visits.
After administration, we are testing participants’ ability to
detect biological motion and read others’ emotions from
the eye region using well-validated fMRI paradigms:
Reading the Mind in the Eyes (RMET-R) and Biological
Motion Detection. Preliminary results are indicating that
in children and adolescents with ASD intranasal
administration of OT results in enhanced activation of the
Superior Temporal Sulcus (STS) region during perception
of biological motion compared to placebo. When going
through RMET-R, OT seems to improve the ability to
accurately define and describe other’s mental states as
well as enhance brain activation in medial Prefrontal
cortex, STS, temporal parietal gyrus and fusifrom – all
regions previously implicated in their involvement in
social perception and cognition, mentalizing, and theory
of mind abilities. These initial results are currently being
expended, but they provide a very promising and exciting
indicator of the neural mechanisms’ underlying OT’s
impact on social perception and cognition in ASD. At
IMFAR, final results will be presented and discussed.
Should this study show that modulating OT levels can
induce specific effects on brain functioning in tasks linked
to the social world; it would be possible to explore novel
more optimal treatment strategies in ASD.

In particular, because connectivity between the STS and
neocerebellum appeared to be related to efficient
processing and relay of information about observed
human actions, we predicted that the degree to which
individuals with ASDs utilized this pathway during
observation and imitation of others’ movements would be
related more broadly to their ability to understand and
interact with others. To test this prediction, we collected
fMRI scans from 13 youth (11 male) with ASDs while they
completed a simple manual imitation task, as well as
measures of IQ, theory of mind, communication skill, and
social behavior. All youth were high-functioning and
completed the imitation task accurately. Effective
connectivity between the right STS and the left
neocerebellum (specifically, Crus I), was strongly
associated with a variety of measures (assessed both via
parent report, in the Social Responsiveness Scale and
Theory of Mind Inventory, and by a trained observer, in
the Autism Diagnostic Observational Schedule) of social
communication, reciprocal social interaction, and
advanced theory of mind skill. Youth with more advanced
theory of mind skills and more intact social and
communicative functioning showed greater imitationspecific effective connectivity between STS and
neocerebellum. These associations held after controlling
for age, IQ, laterality, and for the overall intensity of
activity in the right STS. These data suggest that that
while the degree to which STS is recruited during social
perceptual processes may indeed be an important
predictor of social outcomes, it is not enough to assess
localized activity to understand these processes; rather,
evaluating the coherence of activity across multiple key
regions is also a critical component of understanding
deficits in social perception and behavior. In particular,
communication between sites important for biological
motion perception and often understudied neocerebellar
regions may be important for social functioning. Exploring
the degree to which individuals utilize these connections
while executing basic social perceptual functions could
potentially help to explain variability in presentation and
in social outcomes among persons on the autism
spectrum.

G-33
EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN SUPERIOR
TEMPORAL SULCUS AND NEOCEREBELLUM IS
ASSOCIATED WITH SOCIAL FUNCTION IN YOUTH
WITH AUTISM Allison Jack, University of Virginia; James
P. Morris, University of Virginia- Autism spectrum
disorders (ASDs) have been associated with a variety of
social perceptual deficits, including in biological motion
perception and imitation. Such deficits have, in turn, been
linked to atypicalities in the superior temporal sulcus
(STS), an important site for the processing of human
actions. However, ASD symptomaticity has also been
related to neural connectivity deficits and to abnormalities
across many brain sites, including the cerebellum. Having
previously found that healthy typical adults show taskspecific effective connectivity between the posterior STS
and lobule VII of the neocerebellum during simple manual
imitation and biological motion perception (Jack,
Englander, & Morris, 2011), we hypothesized that this
interaction might be disrupted in individuals with ASDs.

	  

G-34
BASOLATERAL AMYGDALA CELL SUBTYPES MAY
MEDIATE JUVENILE SOCIABILITY IN MOUSE
MODELS Arati S. Kreibich, Perelman School of Medicine at
Univ. Pennsylvania; Matthew Torre, Perelman School of
Medicine at Univ. Pennsylvania; Ruben C. Gur, Perelman
School of Medicine at Univ. Pennsylvania; Hongzhe. Li,
Perelman School of Medicine at Univ. Pennsylvania; Ted Abel,
University of Pennsylvania; Edward S. Brodkin, Perelman
School of Medicine at Univ. Pennsylvania- Reduced
sociability starting in childhood is among the most
disabling and treatment-refractory symptoms of autism
spectrum disorders (ASD). Therefore, there is a strong
need to better understand the neurobiology of juvenile
sociability. Relative to C57BL/6J (B6) mice, BALB/cJ mice
show low levels of sociability during prepubescence. To

57	  

elucidate the neural circuitry underlying sociability, we
mapped Fos expression following social interaction in
juvenile male B6 vs. BALB/cJ mice. We hypothesized that
B6 and BALB/cJ mice would show differential activation
of amygdala nuclei following social interactions. We
compared Fos expression in amygdala nuclei among B6
and BALB/cJ mice exposed to a stimulus mouse in a social
choice test (S)) or not exposed to a stimulus mouse(NS).
We also co-labeled Fos stained nuclei in BLA of B6 mice
with either Parvalbumin (PV) , a marker of GABAergic
cells, or CaMKII, a marker of glutamatergic cells.Social
exposure increased Fos staining in the basolateral
amygdala (BLA) specifically in B6 mice, but not in BALB
mice. In the BLA, the proportion of Fos cells co-labeled
with CaMKII or PV cells was similar in B6 mice (S) when
compared with B6 mice NS. Therefore, a circuit involving
both glutamatergic and GABAergic BLA neurons is
activated during social interaction.The BLA mediates
salience and emotional valence of external stimuli, and its
output includes brain regions regulating motivation,
reward and motor output. Further elucidation of
underlying BLA mechanisms may lead to novel
approaches for rescuing sociability in ASD.

data support previous suggestions that the neural
representation of expected value is disrupted in youth
with DBD+CU.
G-36
YOUTH
WITH
CONDUCT
DISORDER
AND
CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL TRAITS SHOW HIGHLY
ATYPICAL PREDICTION ERROR SIGNALING IN
CAUDATE AND ORBITAL FRONTAL CORTEX W.
Craig Williams, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH;
Stuart F. White, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH;
Kayla Pope, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH; Stephen
Sinclair, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH; Christopher
Adalio, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH; Daniel S.
Pine, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH; R.J.R Blair,
National Institute of Mental Health, NIH- Background:
Previous research has associated abnormalities in reversal
learning and reinforcement signaling in youth with
Conduct Disorder and callous-unemotional traits
(CD+CU) with atypical orbital frontal cortex (OFC) and
caudate responsivity (Finger et al., 2008; 2011). However,
previous work with this population has not disentangled
BOLD responses during decision making as opposed to
feedback. As such it remains unclear whether patients
with CD+CU show atypical reinforcement expectancy
guided decision making or impairments in prediction
error signaling or both. The present study addressed this
issue. Methods: 20 CD+CU youth and 24 healthy
comparison youth completed a passive avoidance task
while undergoing fMRI. Cue regressors were weighted by
expected value (the degree to which the cue predicted
reward/ punishment).
Feedback regressors were
weighted by prediction error (the degree to which the
feedback received corresponded to expected value).
Results: A 2 (CD+CU vs. control) x 2 (weighted reward vs.
punishment) ANOVA conducted on the BOLD responses
to feedback revealed significant interactions within the
amygdala, OFC, caudate and posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC). Within these regions, heatlhy individuals showed
typical positive prediction errors (increased activity) to
unexpected rewards and negative prediction errors
(decreased activity) to unexpected punishments. Youth
with CD+CU showed a significantly different pattern with
atypically
increased
responses
to
unexpected
punishments.
Conclusions: These findings support
previous evidence for atypical amygdala, OFC and
caudate activity in patients with CD+CU. Importantly,
these data suggest that rather than showing simply
reduced prediction error signaling relative to comparison
youth, as had been previously suggested, youth with
CD+CU may be showing a very atypical prediction error
signaling with augmented activity to unexpected
punishment.

G-35
YOUTH WITH DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR DISORDERS
AND CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL TRAITS SHOW
IMPAIRED
NEURAL
REPRESENTATION
OF
EXPECTED VALUE Stuart F. White, National Institute of
Mental Health, NIH; Katherine A. Fowler, National Institute of
Mental Health, NIH; Stephen Sinclair, National Institute of
Mental Health, NIH; Daniel S. Pine, National Institute of
Mental Health, NIH; R.J.R. Blair, National Institute of Mental
Health, NIH- Background: In previous work, we have
shown that youth with Disruptive Behavior Disorders
(DBD: Conduct Disorder and Oppositional Defiant
Disorder) and callous-unemotional (CU: reduced guilt and
empathy) traits show impaired decision-making that is
coupled with dysfunctional responding within the
amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC; Finger et al.,
2008). However, this work has not distinguished between
dysfunction during decision-making vs. feedback, nor has
it
examined
decision-making
with
respect
to
environmental reinforcements (e.g., appetitive stimuli,
physical threats, or contamination threats). Methods:
Using a novel affective decision-making paradigm, fMRIs
were conducted on15 youth with DBD+CU and 15
matched controls. Results: Regions showing a diagnosis
by choice by emotion interaction included right orbital
frontal cortex, right middle frontal gyrus, two areas in the
right insula, left cingulate cortex, left caudate and
thalamus. When making poor decisions (choosing to open
disgust/threat doors, choosing not to open positive
doors), healthy controls showed increased activation
relative to DBD+CU youth. Contrary to predictions,
dysfunction during feedback was not observed.
Conclusions: Youth with DBD+CU traits do not appear to
be generating the same warning signaling that the healthy
youth do when choosing to make poor decisions. These

	  

G-37
EARLY DISTURBED CAREGIVING, AMYGDALA
REACTIVITY AND COGNITIVE ENGAGEMENT IN
ADULTHOOD: RESULTS FROM A 20- YEAR
PROSPECTIVE STUDY Pia Pechtel, Harvard Medical

58	  

School; Carl Andersen, Harvard Medical School; Martin H.
Teicher, Harvard Medical School; Karlen Lyons-Ruth, Harvard
Medical School- According to the US Health and Human
Services Department, 3.7 million children were
investigated by Child Protective Services in 2008, with
25% under the age of 2 and a majority experiencing
parental neglect. Research has indicated that such
disturbed care early in life is a significant risk factor for
subsequent
affective
disorders
and
amygdala
hyperreactivity. However, retrospective studies have
limited capacity to characterize the type and timing of
adversity during the earliest years of life. To address this
methodological limitation, the current study administered
an Amygdala Reactivity Paradigm (Hariri, 2009) to
participants recruited from a 20-year prospective study of
infants at social risk, whose aim was to investigate the
long-term sequelae of disturbed early care. At the age of
18 months, comprehensive family risk assessments were
conducted of the quality of infant care,
including
videotaped observations of the degree of disturbance in
parent-infant interactions. Half of the participants were
referred for clinical services because of the degree of
caregiving disturbance. Participants were also assessed at
later developmental periods. In the present wave of
assessment, 16 adults who experienced early disturbed
caregiving at 18 months of life (EDC; 11 female, 5 male,
Mage= 29.3yrs) and 21 adults without childhood adversity
(14 female, 7 male, Mage=23.4yrs) participated in the
Amygdala Reactivity Paradigm consisting of 13 blocks of
geometrical shapes or emotional facial expressions (anger,
threat, neutral). The goal of the task is to match two
different stimuli to a target face on the top of the screen.
Reaction time and accuracy were used as behavioral
indices of emotion reactivity. Based on previous research,
we hypothesized that, relative to controls, adults who
experienced EDC would show heightened emotion
reactivity indexed by (1) higher number of errors, (2)
shorter reaction times, and (3) increased amygdala
activation in response to negative faces compared to
neutral faces or shapes. Whole-brain contrasts focused on
responses to negative faces compared to neutral faces or
shapes between EDC and controls. Region-of-interest
analyses tested amygdala activation in response to
negative faces compared to neutral faces and shapes
between the groups. Results indicated that, compared to
controls, individuals who experienced EDC committed
significantly more errors when matching negative faces
than neutral faces or shapes, and showed faster reaction
times in matching faces compared to shapes. In contrast to
hypotheses, both groups showed similar activation in the
amygdala when contrasting negative faces to neutral faces
or shapes. However, in cortical regions implicated in
cognitive control and sustained attention (e.g., superior
frontal gyrus), controls showed significantly greater
signal increases in response to negative faces relative to
shapes than did the EDC group. The pattern of findings
suggests that, by adulthood, amygdala hyperreactivity
associated with early life adversity (e.g. Tottenham et al.,
2011) may be affected by the development of

	  

compensatory
attention
strategies
that
involve
disengaging from the task during trials containing
arousing stimuli but not during trials containing neutral
information.
G-38
ABNORMAL SOCIAL PAIN PROCESSING IN
CHILDREN
WITH
EARLY
SEPARATION
EXPERIENCES – A FMRI STUDY WITH CHILDREN IN
CARE Vanessa Puetz, Aachen University; Nils Kohn, Aachen
University, JARA Translational Brain Medicine, Aachen &
Jülich; Beate Herpertz-Dahlmann, Aachen University, JARA
Translational Brain Medicine, Aachen & Jülich; Kerstin
Konrad, Aachen University, JARA Translational Brain
Medicine, Aachen & Jülich- Introduction: Early separation
experiences can disrupt the child’s attachment process and
interfere with the psychosocial development of an infant.
The current study therefore aims to investigate the neural
mechanisms by which attachment to and early separation
from the primary caregiver influences structural and
functional brain development in children. Specifically,
early separation experiences are hypothesized to render
these children more susceptible to social exclusion and
rejection, as reflected in differential activation of the
social-pain network including fronto-limbic structures
(anterior cingulate, mPFC and hippocampus). Methods:
25 children that grew up with their biological parents
(mean age 10.38 ± 1.7; mean IQ= 104.52 ± 9.3) and 23
children with an early parental separation experience
(mean age 10.4 ± 1.82; mean IQ= 103.17 ± 9.3; mean age of
separation= 1.5 years ± 1.07) underwent a social-exclusion
paradigm (Virtual ball tossing game ‘CyberBall’, Williams
et al., 2000) in an 3T-MRI scanner to investigate the neural
correlates of social exclusion. Data-analysis was conducted
with SPM8. To test for differential activation in response
to social pain (social exclusion condition vs, non-social
exclusion condition) whole-brain analyses were carried
out (p .05, Monte Carlo corrected). For a-priori anatomical
and functional region-of-interests (ROIs), small volume
corrections were applied across each respective region
(p<0.05, voxel-level FWE-correction). fMRI results: The
comparison between exclusion due to social reasons vs.
non-social reasons in control subjects revealed strong
neural activation in the ACC, left and right insula and
rmPFC, replicating previous research on social pain.
Further analysis revealed greater activation in the ACC
and superior frontal cortex in the control group compared
to the early-separation (ES) group in response to social
pain. A significant interaction between condition x group
was found in the superior temporal sulcus (STS) and
tempo-parietal junction (TPJ), which were active during
the Social Pain condition only in the ES group. ROIanalysis revealed differences in neural activation between
groups also in the right hippocampus. These differences
were due to increased neural activation during Social Pain
in the ES group. Conclusion: Preliminary analysis of the
fMRI data revealed robust differences in neural activation
in response to social exclusion between the groups. In line
with previous research, the typical “pain matrix”

59	  

consisting of the ACC, left and right insulae and rmPFC
was active in our control children. Interestingly, activation
in the ACC, which has been implicated in signalling
situations that require cognitive control was absent in the
ES group, suggesting an abnormal pain response when
facing ostracism. Rather, when facing social threat
children with ES experience activated brain areas that are
involved in mentalizing, theory of mind and action
understanding (STS/TPJ), as well as episodic memory
(hippocampus). These results suggest abnormal social
brain functioning in children with an early parental
separation experience that could be mediated by impaired
PFC-regulation, confirming our hypothesis that early
separation has a long-lasting effect on children’s brain
activation in social situations.

identified in emotional and social brain networks all
suggesting increased reactions to maternal criticism
compared to neutral statements, including the anterior
insula (AI; involved in perception and evaluation of
emotional information), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC;
involved in social information processing, associating
emotional information with the self, and emotion
regulation), and dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC; involved in
executive control and initiation of emotion regulation)
(p<.001, 21 voxels contiguity). There were no activation
differences in the same brain regions between praise and
neutral remarks. These results provided evidence that
maternal criticism provoked increased/sustained activity
in brain regions associated with not only social and
emotional information processing but regulation. This
present study suggests that it is normal to show negative
reactivity to maternal criticism and regulate it in healthy
youth. Possibly not fully internalizing critical comments
from one’s parents as one way to regulate reactivity to
criticism is a critical feature of healthy development.
More vulnerable youth may fail to regulate their
responses, effectively taking their parents comments too
much to heart.

G-39
NEURAL RESPONSES TO MATERNAL CRITICISM IN
HEALTHY YOUTH: IT’S BETTER IF YOU DON’T
REALLY LISTEN Kyung Hwa Lee, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine; Jennifer S. Silk, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine; Ronald E. Dahl, University of California,
Berkeley; Greg J. Siegle, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine- Maternal criticism is an important factor in
emotional and social development during childhood and
adolescence that is characterized by increased parent-child
conflict (Steinberg, 2005). Children and adolescents show
heightened emotional reactivity in social contexts and
often have difficulty regulating these emotions (Steinberg,
2006; Dahl, 2004). Imaging studies demonstrate that such
heightened reactivity is associated with greater activity in
emotion brain networks in the contexts of face processing
and peer relationships (Burnett et al., 2011). However,
despite the ubiquity of maternal criticism and its
association with vulnerability to disorders such as
depression (Hooley et al, 2004; Sheeber et al., 2001),
relatively little is known about neural mechanisms
associated
with
maternal
criticism
in
youth.
Understanding these mechanisms could suggest pathways
from maternal criticism to psychopathologies associated
with expressed emotion such as depression. We
hypothesized that youth would show increased activity to
maternal criticism in brain regions not only involved in
processing social and emotional information but also
emotion regulation. To examine neural responses to
maternal criticism in ecological social contexts, we
adapted an experimental paradigm previously used with
adults (Hooley, et al., 2009). Twenty-five healthy children
and adolescents with no axis I disorder (18 female, age 917) were scanned while they listened to their own
mothers’ critical, praise, and neutral remarks. Each
mother was asked to produce two 30 second audio clips
describing things that bother her about her child, two 30
second audio clips describing things that she especially
likes about her child and two 30 second neutral clips.
Participants reported more intense negative emotions to
their own mother’s criticism than neutral remarks.
Significant condition (criticism vs. neutral)-by-time (i.e.,
scans within trials of a given condition) interactions were

	  

G-40
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN RISK TAKING, SOCIAL
EXCLUSION,
AND
PEER
INFLUENCE
IN
ADOLESCENCE: AN FMRI STUDY Shannon J. Peake,
Department of Psychology, University of Oregon; Tom J.
Dishion, Child & Family Center, University of Oregon,
Department of Psychology, Arizona State University; Beth A.
Stormshak, Child & Family Center, Department of Counseling
Psychology, University of Oregon; Jennifer H. Pfeifer,
Department of Psychology, University of Oregon- Risk
behavior is known to peak in adolescence, resulting in
negative outcomes for teens from activities including
substance use, unsafe sex, careless driving, smoking, and
antisocial behavior. Most of the time, adolescents engage
in these risky activities in social contexts with peers. The
increased importance of peer acceptance versus social
exclusion during adolescence may, therefore, play a
prominent role in decision-making in social contexts.
While previous neuroimaging studies have identified
brain regions involved in social exclusion and risk taking
separately, the effect of social exclusion on subsequent risk
decisions remains unclear. This study investigated neural
activation in adolescents during risk taking in a social
context, before and after an episode of social exclusion by
peers. Twenty-six adolescents (14-16 years old) completed
two computerized tasks in one fMRI session. The Stoplight
task (Gardner and Steinberg, 2005) measured risk-taking
as participants played a driving game in the presence of
two hypothetical peers (implied to be watching the
participant via the Internet). Next, subjects completed the
Cyberball task (Williams, Cheung, and Choi, 2000), which
creates the subjective experience of social exclusion via a
ball-toss game in which the participant played with the
same two implied peers. Afterward, participants played
the Stoplight task again while their performance was

60	  

ostensibly being watched by the same peers that just
excluded them during the Cyberball task. Participants also
completed a several self-report measure that assessed
resistance to peer influence. Changes in risk taking
following social exclusion were negatively correlated with
resistance to peer influence (r(22) = -.44, p < .05). In other
words, teens that had less resistance to peer influence took
significantly more risks after being socially excluded. This
study focused specifically on decision-making processes in
the two rounds of Stoplight only, one “before” and one
“after” social exclusion. Using SPM8, we modeled
“decisions” (choosing to go or stop at yellow lights) and
“feedback” (finding out if they crashed or safely crossed
the intersection). During Stop decisions after social
exclusion, greater neural responses were found in medial
orbitofrontal cortex and medial posterior cingulate cortex
– areas associated with reward valuation and social
cognition. During Crash feedback after social exclusion,
greater responses were also found in subgenual anterior
cingulate cortex and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex,
regions associated with negative affect related to social
pain and self-regulation. Resistance to peer influence was
negatively correlated to right temporoparietal junction
(rTPJ) during Go compared to Stop decisions after social
exclusion – an area associated with mentalizing, or
thinking about what other people are thinking. After
being socially excluded, teens with lower resistance to
peer influence showed more activation in the right TPJ
region, when deciding to Go instead of Stop. Results
suggest that after social exclusion, teens that are more
susceptible to peer influence take more risks and place
more value on performance while peers are watching –
including feeling more social pain when their performance
is low. Further, these teens may devote more effort to
controlling their feelings and to thinking about what peers
are thinking while making risk decisions.

underwent fMRI while playing a driving game known as
the “Stoplight Task” (Gardner & Steinberg, 2005). The goal
is to reach the destination as fast as possible. As each
stoplight turns yellow, participants must decide whether
to stop or go. Stops result in a 3-sec delay. Choosing to go
through the light may result in no delay, but may also
result in crashing and a 6-sec delay (as well as
experiencing a startling simulation of a car crash).
Adolescents completed five distinct games, each
consisting of ten stoplights. Using SPM8, we modeled
neural activity at yellow lights (representing the onset of
the decision-making period) according to the decision
ultimately made at that intersection: “go” or “stop.” We
also modeled responses to feedback immediately
following the intersection: “crash” or “safe crossing” (no
crash). Ventral striatum (VS) showed more activation
preceding “go” versus “stop” decisions, whereas
activation in the right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) was
greater preceding “stop” versus “go” decisions. In
addition, the magnitude of VS activity during “go”
decisions was positively correlated with self-reported
sensation-seeking (SSS-V; Zuckerman, Eysenck, &
Eysenck, 1978). This suggests neural responses during
decision-making, observed in regions associated with
reward processing and prediction error, contribute to
individual differences in factors affiliated with
adolescents’ tendencies to engage in actual risky behavior
in their everyday lives. Finally, we observed changes as a
function of playing the game over time (entered as a
parametric modulator in the single subject models). Both
decision-related and feedback-related activation changed
as a function of time. Specifically, as the games
progressed, “go” decisions were associated with
decreasing activity in the rIFG, and “safe crossings” were
associated with increasing caudate and thalamus activity.
In other words, during decision-making periods in early
games, adolescents tended to exhibit a mixture of VS and
rIFG activity, perhaps reflecting indecision between taking
a risk or playing it safe. The observed refinement of
responses, to more sharply distinguish between “stop”
and “go” decisions, may suggest that adolescents became
progressively more decisive as they played the five games,
perhaps related to the increase in response to positive
feedback. These changes support the idea that both
rewarding and regulatory influences on decision-making
processes crystallize as adolescents learn about riskreward trade-offs.

★

G-41
NEURAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS DRIVE BEHAVIOR:
ADOLESCENTS' RISKY DECISION-MAKING IN AN
FMRI DRIVING SIMULATION
Lauren E. Kahn,
University of Oregon; Shannon P. Peake, University of Oregon;
Beth Stormshak, University of Oregon; Tom Dishion, Arizona
State University; Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University of OregonDuring adolescence, teenagers are faced with many
decisions involving risk. These choices often include a
trade-off between a risky option involving immediate or
more reward, versus a safer option involving delayed or
less reward. Although paradigms using monetary
incentives accurately model this type of trade-off, the
actual risky decisions made by adolescents have very
different outcomes, many of which can be life-altering
even after a single bad decision (e.g., having unprotected
sex, speeding through a red light, or drinking and
driving). The present study was designed to assess
decision-making and feedback processing in a situation
that more closely modeled those which adolescents face
every day. Participants (N = 27, ages 14-16 years)

	  

G-42
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL PAIN PREDICT
CHANGES IN DRIVING RISK IN THE PRESENCE OF
PEERS Christopher N. Cascio, University of Michigan;
Matthew O’Donnell, University of Michigan; Joshua Carp,
University of Michigan; Francis Tinney, University of
Michigan; Ray Bingham, University of Michigan; Jean Shope,
University of Michigan; Marie-Claude Oimet, NICHD,
Université de Sherbrooke; Anuj Pradhan, NICHD; Bruce
Simons-Morton, NICHD; Emily B. Falk, University of
Michigan- Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of

61	  

death in adolescents. This phenomenon is not explained
solely by inexperience of teen drivers; teens are at normal
risk when driving in the presence of an adult, and at
substantially increased risk when driving in the presence
of peers. Understanding the factors that lead teens to be
more susceptible to peer influence in the driving context
both addresses a key question of social development, and
may also aid in creating interventions that reduce teen
driving fatalities. The present study used a brain-aspredictor approach to examine whether activity in neural
regions associated with emotion processing during social
exclusion can predict future increases in driving risk in the
presence of a peer. More specifically, 42 newly licensed
male drivers, aged 16-17, were recruited to participate in a
two part study, consisting of an initial neuroimaging
session, followed one week later by a driving simulator
session. During the fMRI session participants completed a
well-validated social exclusion task, Cyberball, in which
participants are excluded, ostensibly by two other players.
In addition to neuroimaging data, self-report measures of
susceptibility to peer pressure and self-reported distress in
response to the exclusion were gathered. One week
following, participants took part in the driving simulator
portion of the study, completing drives in a state-of-theart, full-cab driving simulator, alone and in the presence of
either a risky or safe confederate. We found that neural
activity in one hypothesized, anatomically defined region
associated with emotion regulation -- rostral anterior
cingulate cortex (rACC), significantly predicted increased
risk-taking between alone and peer drives.
Neural
activity in this region predicted change in risk behavior
above and beyond the amount of behavior change
explained by the behavior of the confederate (risky versus
safe), driving order, self-reports of susceptibility to peer
pressure, and self-reported feelings of distress following
exclusion. Additionally, hypothesized regions associated
with social pain in adolescents (subgenual cingulate,
anterior insula) significantly predicted increased risktaking in the presence of peers. The present study
demonstrates that neural activity in regions associated
with social pain predicts adolescent behavior change in
the presence of peers, beyond what is explained by selfreports of susceptibility to peer pressure and other factors.
These results suggest that adolescents most responsive to
social exclusion are more likely to alter their normal
behavior in the presence of peers. More generally, these
findings also demonstrate and extend the beneficial use of
examining neural mechanisms in order to understand real
world behaviors.

communication, dynamic portrayals of emotions are a
more ecologically valid tool for research settings.
However, the majority of studies have used static
portrayals of emotion instead. Moreover, the human brain
itself may be organized in a unique manner to process
emotion; this organization has been particularly examined
in terms of the lateralization of functions amongst the left
and right hemispheres of the brain. Furthermore, recent
findings in neuroscience revealing that the human brain
undergoes significant age-related changes in anatomy and
physiology suggest that a reorganization of strategies and
activation patterns may underlie some basic cognitive
functions, including emotion perception. The current
study investigated two fields of emotion research in a
cognitive aging context, namely the identification of
emotions from body movements and the hemispheric
lateralization of emotion perception. In Experiment 1, 50
participants (25 younger and 25 older adults) were
presented with emotion stimuli depicting anger, disgust,
fear, happiness, and sadness portrayed by actors in grey
full body suits with the facial features and expressions
masked. All participants viewed videos of the actors
portraying these emotions through body movements (e.g.
advancing forward and shaking fists in anger), and static
images which were captured from the videos. After each
stimulus presentation, participants indicated which
emotion they thought was represented. The results
revealed a significant main effect for presentation type
(static vs. dynamic) and age (younger vs. older), and a
significant interaction between emotion and presentation
type. Post- hoc analyses revealed that each of the emotions
was significantly more accurately recognized from
dynamic than static presentations across age groups. In
Experiment 2 we investigated hemispheric specialization
for identifying dynamically expressed emotions. The same
50 participants viewed the video stimuli again, which
were randomly presented to either the right or left visual
fields while participants maintained gaze on a central
fixation point. Participants then selected which emotion
had been presented. The results demonstrated a
significant main effect of hemisphere, indicating that
participants across both age groups correctly identified
more emotions when they were presented to the left visual
field (i.e. right hemisphere). Overall, the current study
suggests that although emotion perception abilities
generally decline with age, the advantage for recognizing
emotion from dynamic than static stimuli is an enduring
ability throughout the life span. Furthermore, the results
support the idea that right hemispheric superiority for
emotion processing remains constant with age.

G-43
PROCESSING EMOTIONS ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN:
INVESTIGATING
LATERALIZATION
AND
DYNAMIC EXPRESSIONS Ishabel M. Vicaria, University
of Miami; Dr. Thomas H. Bak, The University of Edinburgh;
Dr. Sarah E. MacPherson, The University of Edinburgh- The
ability to perceive emotions is an enduring human trait
that facilitates social interaction throughout the life span.
Due to the three-dimensional quality of authentic

	  

★

G-44
EMOTIONAL
AWARENESS
ACROSS
DEVELOPMENT: DORSAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE
CORTEX MEDIATES THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
AGE AND TRAIT ALEXITHYMIA Jocelyn Shu, Columbia
University; Jennifer A. Silvers, Columbia University; Jiahe
Zhang, Columbia University; Jochen Weber, Columbia

62	  

University; Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia UniversityAlexithymia is a trait characterized by difficulty
identifying and expressing one’s emotions. In adult
populations, alexithymia has been associated with a
multitude of disorders, including autism and depression.
The prevalence of this trait amongst clinical populations
points to the importance of understanding how emotional
awareness develops across the life span. While prior
research has demonstrated age-related increases in
knowledge and understanding of one’s emotions, no work
has yet investigated the underlying neural mechanisms
that may be supporting these changes across
development. The present study sought to fill this gap in
the literature by scanning 44 participants ranging from 1022 years of age (M = 16.09, SD = 3.77) on a task that
involved taking an immersed perspective while looking at
aversive and neutral images and rating one's emotional
experience.
Emotional awareness was assessed in
participants by administering the adult version of the
Toronto Alexithymia Scale to participants 15 years and
older and the children’s version of the scale to participants
14 years and younger. Age was negatively correlated with
trait alexithymia scores, suggesting that alexithymia
decreases with maturation. Across all ages, aversive
picture stimuli recruited dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
(dACC), a brain region believed to support emotional
awareness, to a greater degree than did neutral stimuli. A
single-level mediation analysis further revealed that
dACC activity increased with age and, when controlling
for age, predicted less trait alexithymia. These results
suggest that dACC may be involved in facilitating
enhanced emotional awareness as one transitions from
childhood to adulthood.

study, 32 8-year-old children were presented with
backward masked fearful and happy eye-whites and eyeblacks while brain activity was measured by functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Contrary to adult
findings, results did not show amygdala modulation by
emotional eye-whites or eye-blacks in child participants.
However, other brain areas (bilateral visual cortex, left
thalamus, the left insula, the anterior cingulate, left
orbitofrontal cortex) showed differentiation by emotion,
indicating that the eye-white and eye-black probes were
being processed despite lack of explicit awareness of these
stimuli. These findings not only identify brain regions
that are selectively activated by these stimuli in children
but they also indicate changes in the fast amygdala
pathway tapped by backward-masking paradigms. It is
posited that these changes are associated with the
development of children’s processing of face emotion and
spatial frequency information.
G-46
PRETTY, POPULAR, SMART? UNIQUE NEURAL
ACTIVATION
WHEN
COMPARING
EARLY
ADOLESCENT AND ADULT APPRAISALS OF SELF
AND OTHER Kathryn F. Jankowski; Junaid S. Merchant;
William E. Moore; Lauren E. Kahn; Jennifer H. PfeiferPrevious research on the neural substrates of selfprocessing has primarily focused on adult samples, yet
few studies have investigated the developmental
trajectory from adolescence to adulthood. Given the major
changes in brain structure development, perspectivetaking abilities, peer social interaction, and self-concept
refinement, it is expected that the neural mechanisms
underlying self-processing change during this transition.
While past studies have primarily capitalized on
psychological traits, developmental research shows that
physical self-appraisals are the single strongest predictor
of adolescent global self-worth (Harter, 1999), suggesting
the important contribution of using physical traits to
explore adolescent self-processing. The current study
investigated the differential neural correlates for making
direct self-appraisals, reflected self-appraisals, and directother appraisals across development, and is the first study
to use both psychological and physical traits within a
developmental sample. In a mixed design, fMRI task, 19
young adults (M = 25.7, 9 males) and 18 early adolescents
(M = 12.44 years, 10 males) read short phrases describing
academic, physical, and social traits and evaluated if the
phrase accurately described oneself (from one’s own
perspective or from one’s best friend’s perspective), one’s
best friend, or traits that, in general, could change (control
condition). While previous studies typically use political
figures as “other” targets and semantic control tasks (such
as counting syllables), this study includes a personallyrelevant, close peer for multiple appraisal conditions, and
an evaluative control task. Data were preprocessed and
analyzed in FSL, SPM, and Neuroelf. At the fixed effects
level, reaction time was included as a parametric
modulator, and motion parameters and scans
characterized by significant artifacts were included as

G-45
EVIDENCE FOR DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGE IN
AMYGDALA RESPONSE TO MASKED EMOTIONAL
EYE-WHITES AND EYE-BLACKS Angela Tseng, New
York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University; Kathleen
M. Thomas, University of Minnesota- Existing adult human
and animal literature has specified the amygdala’s
participation in the decoding of facial expressions and
thus, emotional face stimuli has been consistently
employed as an efficacious probe of amygdala activity.
Yet, there is a dearth in the understanding of the
development of the ability to readily recognize and
interpret faces and facial expressions of emotion. There is
a basic consensus that face recognition accuracy improves
from childhood to adulthood but less accord on the
particular components of face recognition that alter with
development. Prior research in adults has also shown that
the amygdala is activated not only by the eye components
of an emotional face (Morris et al., 2002) but also low-level
perceptual features such as eye-whites (sclera) (Whalen et
al., 2004). In particular, Whalen and colleagues (2004)
showed that the amygdala is more responsive to masked
fearful eye-whites than to masked happy eye-whites.
However, it is unclear whether this effect develops with
experience or if it is present from birth. In the present

	  

63	  

nuisance regressors. At the random effects level, a 2 (age
group) x 4 (target) x 3 (domain) repeated measures
ANOVA was conducted. Parameter estimates were
extracted using MarsBaR based on functionally-defined
regions of interest from the current study, as well as
independent regions of interest typically recruited during
self-appraisal tasks (Dodell-Feder, Koster-Hale, Bedny, &
Saxe, 2011). Results demonstrated that neural activity
within cortical midline structures was influenced by target
type, converging with previous research (Pfeifer et al,.
2009; Ochsner et al., 2005), as well as varied by age group
and trait domain.

and Other for T1 and T2. Neither ventral striatum nor
rACC displayed an interaction effect between target (Self
versus Other) and age (T1 versus T2). However, in the
mPPC/RSC there was a significant interaction between
target and age, in three regions: two clusters in dmPFC
and one cluster in a more anterior region of posterior
cingulate than the mPPC/RSC seed region (uncorrected, p
< 0.005, k > 20). Analyses conducted to interrogate this
interaction effect indicated that connectivity in all three
regions was stronger for Self than Other at T1 (age 10), but
reversed by T2 (age 13). Greater connectivity between
mPPC/RSC and dmPFC during appraisals of Other than
Self in adolescence may ultimately be related to the
development of a more mature pattern of responses in
dmPFC (typically greater during other- than selfappraisals in adults). Additionally, the longitudinal
increase in connectivity between the two posterior midline
regions was correlated with an increase in knowledge
about Harry Potter. Together, our results suggest that
there are important differences in brain connectivity
supporting appraisals of self and other between childhood
and early adolescence.

G-47
LONGITUDINAL
CHANGES
IN
BRAIN
CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN CHILDHOOD AND
EARLY ADOLESCENCE DURING APPRAISALS OF
SELF AND OTHER
Kim Veroude, VU University
Amsterdam; Mirella Dapretto, University of California, Los
Angeles; Matthew D. Lieberman, University of California, Los
Angeles; Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University of Oregon- The
transitional period from childhood to adolescence is a
developmental phase during which self-concepts become
more differentiated and peer relations become more
important. Research in adults demonstrates that the
anterior rostral medial prefrontal cortex (armPFC;
including rostral anterior cingulate cortex, rACC) is
relatively more engaged when thinking about self than
others. Meanwhile, the medial posterior parietal cortex
(mPPC) is frequently more engaged when thinking about
others than self (Qin et al., 2012). Compared to adults,
children and adolescents show stronger activation of the
mPFC (including both anterior rostral and dorsal aspects)
during self-appraisals (Pfeifer et al., 2007, 2009). In
addition, adults typically show stronger activation of
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) during otherappraisals, also in comparison to children. In this study,
we were interested in task-dependent functional
connectivity during appraisals of self and other,
specifically how this changed over time as children
transitioned into early adolescence. Twenty-seven
children (18 girls, 9 boys) participated in this longitudinal
fMRI study. They performed an appraisal task in the fMRI
scanner at 10 (T1) and 13 (T2) years of age. During this
task, short phrases from the social domain (e.g. ‘I have
many friends’) or the academic domain (e.g. ‘I like going
to the library’) were presented. Participants indicated by
button press whether the phrases described the Self or a
familiar fictional Other (Harry Potter). We conducted
Psychophysiological Interaction (PPI) analyses in SPM8 to
investigate differences in brain connectivity for appraisals
of Self and Other, as they changed over development.
Seed regions of interest were derived from the main effect
of target (Self and Other) across T1 and T2 (Pfeifer at al., in
prep). These areas were differentially activated for Self
and Other, across timepoints, and included the ventral
striatum, the rACC and a region of mPPC/retrosplenial
cortex (RSC). Timecourses from those regions were
extracted and convolved with the experimental factors Self

	  

★

G-48
NEURAL CORRELATES UNDERLYING COGNITIVE
REGULATION OF APPETITIVE RESPONSES TO
FOOD ACROSS DEVELOPMENT
Catherine Insel,
Columbia University; Jennifer A. Silvers, Columbia University;
Natalie Porter, Columbia University; Jocelyn Shu, Columbia
University; Alisa Powers, Weill Cornell Medical College;
Natasha Mehta, Weill Cornell Medical College; B. J. Casey,
Weill Cornell Medical College; Walter Mischel, Columbia
University; Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia UniversityBehavioral and neuroimaging experiments have
suggested that children and adolescents show exaggerated
responses to appetitive cues, and those prone to obesity
exhibit higher reactivity to images of caloric food.
However, no prior work has examined how the ability to
regulate cravings for unhealthy food changes across
development. In the present two studies, we examined the
neural and behavioral bases of emotion regulation of
appetitive impulses in children and adolescents using a
food reappraisal task. These studies included a pilot
behavioral study (n=15, ages 7-22) and a functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study (n=10, ages 618). In both studies, participants were trained to use two
different strategies while looking at pictures of appetizing
foods. On “Close” trials, participants imagined that the
food they saw was directly in front of them and focused
on its appetitive features (e.g., taste, smell). On “Far”
trials, participants imagined that the food was further
away and focused less on its appetitive features and more
on its basic visual features (e.g., color, shape). After
viewing the stimulus while applying the instructed
strategy, participants made a rating on a 1-5 scale to
indicate how much they wanted to eat the food that they
had just viewed. Results of the pilot study confirmed our
hypotheses that 1) across all participants, Far trials were

64	  

associated with less self-reported craving than Close trials
(p=0.02), and 2) older individuals were better at regulating
craving impulses through the use of cognitive strategies
(age positively correlated with the percent decrease in
craving observed on Far trials in comparison to Close
trials, p=0.008). Behavioral results from the fMRI study
have shown that again, participants report less craving on
Far trials than Close trials (p=0.04). Neuroimaging results
reveal that decreased amygdala response in the Close
condition as compared to the Far condition is associated
with improved reappraisal success. Taken together, these
findings suggest a potential mechanism for the
development of effective appetitive regulation.

self-reported desirability of both craved and not craved
foods (ps < .001). In addition, reappraised craved foods
were not significantly different than passively viewed notcraved foods (p = .23). Neuroimaging results of a scannercompatible version of this task will be discussed.
G-50
NEUROIMAGING OF THE REGULATION OF
CRAVING IN COCAINE-DEPENDENCE Cameron M.
DeLeone, Yale University School of Medicine; Dan Marino,
Yale University School of Medicine; Kathleen M. Carroll, Yale
University School of Medicine; Hedy Kober, Yale University
School of Medicine- Cocaine is an illicit drug commonly
abused in the United States: in 2009, 787,000 individuals
reported seeking treatment for cocaine abuse or
dependence (SAMHSA, 2010). Unfortunately, long-term
abstinence is not achieved by the majority of those that
enter treatment (Knapp et al., 2007). Drugs users
frequently cite craving as the cause of drug use and
relapse. Consistently, previous research has demonstrated
that craving predicts treatment outcomes (e.g., Rohsenow
et al., 2007). Given the central role of craving in cocaine
use, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), which is one of
the most effective therapies available, includes a
regulation of craving component. In contrast, it is a
commonly
held
view
that
substance-dependent
individuals have a brain-based deficit in inhibitory control
and regulation (e.g., Jentsch & Taylor, 1999; Volkow et al.,
2004). We have previously shown that cigarette smokers
can regulate their craving for cigarettes using a cognitive
strategy, and that a set of prefrontal regions is implicated
in this ability (Kober 2010a; Kober 2010b). In this study,
we sought to investigate whether cocaine-dependent (CD)
individuals can regulate their craving for cocaine using a
cognitive strategy similar to one taught in CBT, and to
identify the neural correlates of this ability. Therefore, a
treatment-seeking sample of cocaine dependent (CD)
individuals completed the Regulation of Craving (ROC)
task while undergoing functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging. Participants were presented with pictures of
food and cocaine, and on each trial instructed to think
about either (a) the immediate sensory experience of
consuming the item (i.e., the “good” things about it;
“NOW”) or (b) the long-term negative consequences of
consuming the item (i.e., how it will affect them negatively
later on; “LATER”). Self-reports suggested that these
individuals were able to reduce their craving for cocaine
when they focused on the long term, negative
consequences of using cocaine, compared to when they
thought about immediately consuming it. Furthermore,
using the LATER strategy resulted in relative deactivation
in a distributed network of subcortical/limbic regions
associated with craving, including the ventral striatum
and amygdala. The LATER strategy also resulted in
increased prefrontal activity in regions previously
associated with cognitive control and regulation of
emotion, including dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC).
Results are consistent with an association between dlPFC
recruitment and “regulation of craving” skills learned

G-49
PIECE OF CAKE: COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL OF
FOOD REWARDS Nicole Giuliani, University of Oregon;
Rebecca Calcott, University of Oregon; Elliot Berkman,
University of Oregon- A common emotion regulation
strategy, cognitive reappraisal, involves altering the
meaning of a situation so that the emotional response to
the situation is changed. Most of the research on
reappraisal has focused on the down-regulation of
negative emotion; few studies exist on the reappraisal of
positive emotion. Furthermore, no studies have yet
examined the cognitive reappraisal of primary rewards
such as that associated with approaching craved high fat,
high calorie foods. In the present study we developed a
new event-related paradigm with which to examine the
neural underpinnings of this form of cognitive
reappraisal. The paradigm consisted of three picture
types: neutral (images of vegetables piloted to be rated as
not very desirable), idiosyncratically craved high
fat/calorie foods, and matched, not-craved high
fat/calorie foods. The foods included in the latter two
categories were chosen by each subject from a list of seven
categories (chocolate, cookies, donuts, French fries, ice
cream, creamy pastas, and pizza) matched for mean
desirability by a pilot sample (pair-wise t-tests all p > .05).
Subjects were instructed either to look at the stimulus or to
reappraise the stimulus so as to make them want to eat the
food less. Subjects were trained extensively in reappraisal
strategies, all of which were applicable to real-world food
situations (e.g. negative consequences of eating the food
(weight gain, upset stomach), imagining that the food had
been dropped on the floor or was touched by someone
with unclean hands). There were 20 trials for each
condition (look neutral, look crave, look no crave, regulate
crave, regulate no crave). Each trial began with a 2s
instruction cue, followed by a 5s presentation of the
picture, 4s to rate food desirability on a 5-point Likert
scale, and a 2s fixation period. A sample of undergraduate
students at the University of Oregon (N = 33, 10 male,
mean age 20.6) performed the task. A repeated-measures
ANOVA found a significant main effect of picture type (F
= 131.1, p < .001) and instruction (F = 125.4, p < .001), as
well as a significant picture type x instruction interaction
(F = 71.9, p < .001). Pairwise t-tests confirmed that the
reappraisal instructions did indeed significantly reduce

	  

65	  

during CBT. Further research could delineate whether and
to what degree a patient’s ability to recruit dlPFC during
treatment contributes to treatment success and long-term
abstinence.

during emotion regulation (reappraisal of negative
emotion-inducing images). The study was designed to
answer the following questions: Does fatigue affect the
ability to regulate emotional experiences? And how is
brain activity, associated with emotional control, affected
by fatigue? To answer these questions, 25 female medical
students with fatigue complaints longer than 4 months
(age 19 – 25) were compared to 25 female medical
students, matched on age, without fatigue complaints.
Both groups were tested after a fatigue inducing session
(1,5 hours of cognitively demanding activity, such as
mental arithmetic’s and N-back tasks) and after a control
session (1,5 hours of less demanding activity, such as
watching nature documentaries). The order of the sessions
was counter-balanced within each group. In the scanner,
the participants viewed neutral as well as negative
emotion-inducing images and were instructed to either
view or reinterpret (reappraise) the images. It was
expected that fatigue, induced by a period of cognitively
demanding activity, is associated with (i) smaller
reduction in negative emotion experience after emotion
reappraisal and (ii) increased and more dispersed PFC
activity during emotion reappraisal showing an increase
in exerted effort to accomplish the task. Furthermore, it
was expected that the effects of induced fatigue are greater
for individuals with long-term fatigue complaints
compared to matched controls. The findings (that will be
presented at the conference) will show how activities in
neural systems involved in the cognitive control of
emotions can be modulated by differences in fatigue state
between as well as within individuals. Moreover, the
results of this study will contribute to knowledge about
fatigue related changes in brain activation, which is
necessary in order to develop effective interventions for
the cognitive component of fatigue problems.

G-51
NEURAL OVERLAP OF BEHAVIORAL INHIBITION
AND AFFECTIVE REGULATION Kathryn S. Gilliam,
University of Oregon; Junaid S. Merchant, University of
Oregon; Lauren E. Kahn, University of Oregon; Elliot T.
Berkman, University of Oregon- Recent findings indicate
that self-control may share a common neural substrate
across the behavioral, cognitive, and affective domains.
The aim of this project is to test hypotheses generated by
this view. Specifically, if there exists such a common
neural substrate, then tasks involving different domains of
self-control would be expected to correlate and also recruit
similar neural networks. We conducted a functional
neuroimaging study assessing affective regulation and
behavioral inhibition in the same individuals to elucidate
potential behavioral correlations and areas of neural
overlap. Twenty-two college-aged participants performed
the stop-signal task (SST), a measure of behavioral
inhibition, and a standard reappraisal task to assess
affective regulation while in the scanner. The SST required
participants to establish a prepotent ‘go’ response and
then to selectively inhibit this response following an
auditory stop cue. The stop signal response time (SSRT)
measure from the SST correlated with level of emotion
regulation (i.e., reduction in distress levels on ‘decrease
emotion’ conditions compared to ‘just look’ conditions),
such that faster behavioral inhibition was associated with
greater affective regulation. Conjunction analyses revealed
the right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) to be active above
threshold during regulation of both the motor response
and emotion. Preliminary analyses indicate that activity in
the rIFG mediates the correlation between performance on
the behavioral inhibition and affective regulation tasks.
These results provide support for the view that the rIFG
serves as a common neural substrate and explains the
associations among different domains of self-control.

G-54
THE ROLE OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS IN THE
REGULATION OF IMPLICIT RACIAL BIAS: AN
EXAMINATION OF ERPS AND INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES IN CONTROL Geoffrey T. Kerr, University
of Colorado- Boulder; Lee J. Altamirano, University of ColoradoBoulder; Naomi P. Friedman, University of Colorado- Boulder;
Akira Miyake, University of Colorado- Boulder; Joshua Correll,
University of Chicago; Bruce D. Bartholow, University of
Missouri; Tiffany A. Ito, University of Colorado- BoulderImplicit measures of racial bias are often interpreted as
reflecting only automatic racial associations, but recent
studies show that controlled processes dramatically affect
task performance. This study investigates the relationship
between individual differences in executive function (EF)
and implicit racial bias. Participants completed a variety
of EF and racial bias tasks. Higher EF was associated with
the implementation of greater control on the racial bias
tasks. We also examined the error-related negativity
(ENR) during the racial bias tasks, a neural measure of
conflict monitoring that is informative when a
participant’s control fails and they make a race-biased
mistake, ERN amplitudes were associated with increased

G-52
FATIGUE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION
REGULATION: AN FMRI STUDY Sarah C. Plukaard, VU
University Amsterdam; Lydia Krabbendam, VU University
Amsterdam; Dick J. Veltman, VU Medical Centre Amsterdam;
Jelle Jolles, VU University Amsterdam- Fatigue is a common
complaint in the general population, which, even in the
absence of serious disease, can have great adverse effects
on the quality of life. For instance, fatigued individuals
perceive much higher effort for executed mental and
physical tasks than non-fatigued individuals and they
may fail to complete successive or ongoing activities.
Although fatigue has been associated with altered mood
as well as declines in cognitive control, no study has
examined the direct effects of fatigue on the cognitive
control of emotions. In the current study, neuroimaging
was used to study fatigue-related changes in brain activity

	  

66	  

implementation of control such that the larger one’s ERNs
after a racially biased mistake the more control
implemented during the task. Our data also show that EF
mediates the relationship between race-biased ERNs and
the implementation of control. Larger race-biased ERNs
result in the recruitment of greater control only for those
with high levels of EF. Taken together, these results
indicate that EF has an important function in the
expression of implicit racial bias.

mechanisms of focused attention (a brief mindfulness
induction commonly taught in healthy and clinical
populations where practioners focus on specific physical
sensations, typically the breath) among novice
practitioners. Relative to the control condition (mind
wandering), focused breathing recruited an attention
network including parietal and prefrontal structures, and
trait level mindfulness during this comparison also
correlated with parietal activation. Results suggest that the
neural mechanisms of a brief mindfulness induction are
related to attention processes in novices and that trait
mindfulness positively moderates this activation. These
data are currently published in a special issue on
mindfulness in the journal SCAN. Future directions for
clinical populations will be presented.

G-55
LOSS OF INHIBITORY CONTROL IN INDIVIDUALS
WITH
POSTTRAUMATIC
STRESS
DISORDER
(PTSD):
AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
AND
BEHAVIORAL STUDY. Lemons, P., The City College of
New York, CUNY; Bibi, R., The Graduate Center, CUNY;
Hien, D., The City College of New York, CUNY; Fertuck, E.A.,
The City College of New York, CUNY; Ruglass, L., The City
College of New York, CUNY; Yoon, P., The Graduate Center,
CUNY; Garcia, E., The City College of New York, CUNY;
Kiriakos, G.,The City College of New York, CUNY; McGiffin,
J., The City College of New York, CUNY; Bornstein, R.Z., The
City College of New York, CUNY; Skiba, R., The City College of
New York, CUNY; Melara, R.D., The City College of New
York, CUNY- A key feature of PTSD involves enhanced
selective attention to threat cues and a bias toward
processing stimuli as threatening, leading to heightened
emotional reactivity. We used a modified version of the
Eriksen Flanker Task, comparing neutral faces with faces
expressing fear, to explore inhibitory control of threatrelated processing in patients diagnosed with PTSD,
people who have been exposed to a traumatic event(s),
and healthy controls. Our use of an attention task in which
distractors (flankers) were separated in time from targets
enabled us to collect electrophysiological measurements
separately to each type of stimulus. Our preliminary
results indicate that patients with PTSD evince deficits in
inhibitory control, as indexed by loss of slow-wave
positivity in a selective attention (filtering) condition
relative to baseline. Group differences were observed
even when face stimuli were neutral, but predominated
when
viewing
threatening
stimuli.
The
electrophysiological
measures
were
significantly
associated with several clinical screening and self-report
indices. Our results suggest that patients with PTSD
suffer general deficits in executive control that are
especially disrupted under conditions of social threat.

G-57
FRAME OF MIND: FRAMING A LEARNING TASK AS
FOCUSED ON PERFORMANCE OR MASTERY
YIELDS A DOUBLE DISSOCIATION OF THE
NEURAL PROCESSES PREDICTING SUBSEQUENT
MEMORY. Guerra-Carrillo, Belen., Baruch College, CUNY;
Rodriguez, Sylvia, Baruch College, CUNY; Mangels, Jennifer,
Baruch College, CUNY- Two achievement goals have been
identified to influence students’ educational outcomes:
performance and mastery. A performance orientation
stresses the importance of proving one’s abilities to
achieve in comparison to others. Traditionally, this goal
has been associated with poorer academic outcomes and
processing information at a superficial level. Conversely, a
mastery goal emphasizes the seeking out of learning
opportunities, and the investment of effort in learning,
and correspondingly, has been linked to positive academic
outcomes. Past research has primarily examined these
relationships only using individual difference measures.
The current study extends this work by investigating how
framing a challenging general knowledge task as either an
opportunity to demonstrate ability compared to others
(performance framing) or as an opportunity to learn new
things (mastery framing) influences students’ abilities to
use feedback to correct memory errors on an immediate
retest. Although we found no behavioral difference in
error correction, event-related potentials (ERPs) recorded
to performance (accuracy) and learning (correct answer)
feedback after each trial revealed different ventral stream
mechanisms by which people learned. From 200-800ms
post-learning feedback, performance framing was
exclusively associated with different due to memory (Dm)
effects over parieto-occipital sites, whereas mastery
framing was associated with Dm effects exclusively over
inferior fronto-temporal sites. The spatiotemporal
distribution of the ERPs in the mastery framing is
characteristic of deep semantic processing, whereas the
distribution for the performance framing is more typical of
a shallow, more perceptual level of encoding. The extent
to which participants in the mastery framing exhibited an
ERP pattern indicative of semantic encoding was also
related to their personal achievement goals measured
prior to the study. The more that students endorsed the

G-56
NEURAL CORRELATES OF FOCUSED ATTENTION
DURING A BRIEF MINDFULNESS INDUCTION Janna
Dickenson
Elliot
Berkman;
Matthew
LiebermanMindfulness—the practice of attending to presentmoment experience and allowing emotions and thoughts
to pass without judgment—has shown to be beneficial in
clinical populations across diverse outcomes. However,
the basic neural mechanisms by which mindfulness
operates and relates to everyday outcomes in novices
remain unexplored. This study explored the neural

	  

67	  

goal of gaining proficiency in the learning material
(mastery-approach goal) the more negative-going the
fronto-temporal Dm effects were over the left hemisphere,
particularly from 400-800 ms. In contrast, endorsement of
the goal to do better in classes than others (performanceapproach goal) was related to reduced negative-going Dm
activity over these sites. There were no significant
relationships between individual goal differences and
neural activity under performance framing. The overall
double disassociation in the spatiotemporal pattern of the
subsequent memory effects across frame suggests that
even relatively subtle changes in a task’s motivational
emphasis can significantly influence the processes a
person uses to encode information. Furthermore, these
effects can be further enhanced or reduced by individual
differences in achievement goals.
G-58
RESISTING THE DEFAULT ACCOUNT OF MIND
WANDERING Jonathan Smallwood, Department of Social
Neuroscience, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive Brain
Sciences - Almost half of mental life is spent being engaged
in imaginative thoughts and feelings that are unrelated to
the events taking place in the here and now, such as when
we daydream about an upcoming vacation or ruminate
about a romantic liaison that went badly. In the last
decade, research has converged on the assumption that
these experiences are produced through the coordinated
action of a constellation of brain regions that are
collectively
known
as
the
default
mode
network. Although this network undoubtedly plays a role
in imaginative thought, recent experience sampling and
neurocognitive evidence indicate that the process of
executive control can also facilitate such experiences. Not
only does this evidence challenge the notion that
daydreaming can be equated with the action of a single
neural system, but data implicating the application of
control processes during mind wandering suggest that a
productive imagination could be a contributory factor to
success and psychological well-being throughout an
individual’s life.

	  

68	  

Poster Session I

expected value of subsequent decisions, and that this
process varies as a function of gender. The effect
specifically manifests in the context of Negative SFB,
which may represent incongruency in how participants
perceive their own choices related to receipt of Negative
SFB.

I-02
THE INFLUENCE OF REPEATED SOCIAL FEEDBACK
ON DECISION-MAKING UNDER RISK: FRAMING
MONETARY CHOICES IN A SOCIAL CONTEXT
Kamila E. Sip, Rutgers University; Anthony J. Porcelli,
Marquette University, Rutgers University; Benedetto De
Martino, University College London, California Institute of
Technology; Mauricio R. Delgado, Rutgers University- The
decisions people make are often influenced by the input of
others. One way that such input can manifest is through
approval or disapproval offered by another person,
referred to as social feedback (SFB). Recent research
indicates that social approval in the form of a positive
reputation with others affects decision-making, and may
be equally rewarding as earning money [Izuma et al.,
2008]. Additionally, a growing body of evidence suggests
that economic choices are influenced by social contexts
[e.g. Fehr & Camerer, 2007; Safney et al., 2008; Tabibnia &
Lieberman, 2007]. However, less is known about how SFB
affects financial decisions and its neural correlates.
Therefore, the aim of this study was two-fold. We
investigated whether a) SFB would modulate behavioral
and neural signals associated with reward processing and
risky decision-making, and b) whether there are gender
differences in the way SFB is processed that can lead to
changes in decision-making? We adapted a welldocumented paradigm where decision options were
presented as an opportunity to win or lose money (gain
and loss frames respectively) [adapted from DeMartino et
al., 2006]. During the task, participants were observed by a
gender-matched confederate who provided occasional
positive (e.g., “Nice!”) or negative (e.g., “Lame!”) feedback
about the choices participants made. Participants (N=32,
16F) responded to the framing manipulation, replicating
previous research using this task; that is, they were more
conservative in the gain frame and riskier in the loss frame
with respect to decisions made. Neurally, the receipt of
Positive versus Negative SFB recruited corticostriatal
circuits previously implicated in differential responses to
positive and negative monetary outcomes suggesting
affective processing of the feedback. Interestingly, after
participants received positive SFB on a series of choices
patterns of risk-taking in females and males diverged.
Specifically, we observed a significant interaction between
gender and SFB such that females became more
conservative after receiving positive feedback in the Loss
frame. A 3-way ANOVA (Decision Frame x SFB x Gender)
revealed a significant 3-way interaction in the left
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC, BA32/11; x,y,z=4, 30, -9), a region typically involved in valuation and
decision-making (Rangel et al., 2008). In females, decreases
in BOLD signals in the vmPFC were observed after
Negative SFB for Loss as compared to Gain frame trials,
with the reverse observed in males. We speculate that
vmPFC integrates SFB-related information with the

	  

I-03
MOTIVATION
AND
TASK
DIFFICULTY
EXPECTATIONS INFLUENCE LEARNING AND
STRIATAL
RESPONSE
TO
PERFORMANCERELATED FEEDBACK
Samantha Swanson, Rutgers
University; Elizabeth Tricomi, Rutgers University- Research
on reinforcement learning has revealed a key role for the
striatum in learning from rewards, punishments, and
feedback about one’s performance. However, striatal
responses to rewards and punishments are not purely
driven by objective properties of the stimuli; they are also
modulated by the context in which these outcomes are
received. This study pairs a novel learning task with
functional magnetic resonance imaging to explore the way
that task difficulty expectations modulate the striatal
response to performance-related feedback. Participants
learned to categorize novel figures through trial-by-trial
feedback. The task was designed with four conditions: two
levels of actual difficulty and two levels of expected
difficulty. Before each block of trials, an arbitrary difficulty
label instructed the participant that the following trials
would be EASY or HARD. The labels were independent of
actual difficulty, but influenced the participants’
expectations. Following the scan, participants completed
questionnaires to assess individual differences in
achievement motivation. Accuracy was significantly
higher for actually easy blocks that were labeled “HARD”
relative to those labeled “EASY.” Normative outcome
goals, which reflect a desire to outperform others, were
positively correlated with these expectation-based
performance differences. These results could reflect a
magnification of the effort and attention that participants
dedicate when anticipating a more challenging task,
especially for those who are high in normative outcome
goals. In the brain, the striatal signal was greater in
response to positive feedback relative to negative feedback
across all conditions. The effect of the difficulty label on
negative feedback signals in the putamen (expected
“EASY” – expected “HARD”) was correlated with
normative outcome goals. In the same region of the
putamen, striatal response to negative feedback was
inversely related to task performance. The fMRI results
suggest that task difficulty expectations interact with
preexisting motivational orientations to produce subtle
differences in the processing of negative feedback, which
may in turn contribute to performance differences across
conditions.
I-04
THE MOTIVATION TO BE MORAL Félice van Nunspeet,
Leiden University; Naomi Ellemers, Leiden University; Belle
Derks, Leiden University; Sander Nieuwenhuis, Leiden

69	  

University- Previous research has shown the importance of
morality (compared to competence or sociability) for
people’s identity, identification with an ingroup and
positive evaluation of ingroup members. However, it has
remained unclear whether people are also implicitly
motivated to behave according to moral norms. In two
ERP studies, we examined whether the motivation to be
moral (vs. competent) affected behavior and neural
markers of task effort. While the first study compared
people’s intrinsic motivation to be moral vs. competent,
the second study examined whether people are more
motivated to behave morally when they are judged by
ingroup or by outgroup members. To test whether people
are more motivated to adjust their task performance when
this is said to measure their morality (rather than their
competence), in Study 1 we framed an Implicit
Association Test (IAT) as either a test of people’s morality
or as a test of people’s competence. In the IAT, nonMuslim participants had to associate pictures of women
with and without a headscarf with positive and negative
pictures. In Study 2, we added a social situation:
Participants were told that they were being evaluated by
someone selected from a group of participants with the
same personality style (an ingroup member) or another
personality style (an outgroup member). In both studies
we recorded event-related brain potentials while
participants were performing the IAT. Behavioral results
of Study 1 confirmed that participants were more
motivated to influence their performance on the moral
rather than competence IAT: Participants who read the
moral implications of the test showed a smaller IAT effect
(i.e., a negative implicit bias towards women with a
headscarf) than participants who read the test implications
concerning their competence. Behavioral results of Study 2
showed that the motivation to be moral is especially
important for self-presentation towards the ingroup:
Compared to participants who thought they were being
evaluated by an outgroup member, participants who
thought they were being evaluated by an ingroup member
showed a smaller IAT effect when the test was said to
measure their morality then when the test was said to
measure their competence. ERP results of both studies
gave insight into how participants succeeded in reducing
their bias in the IAT: They more strongly distinguished
outgroup from ingroup targets in the N1 and P150
components. Moreover, for participants in the morality
conditions, N450 amplitudes more strongly distinguished
between incongruent and congruent trials. Finally,
examination of the ERN revealed that compared to
competence instructions, morality instructions resulted in
increased performance monitoring. As such, the current
two studies reveal how focusing people on the moral
implications of their behavior, and giving them feedback
from ingroup members, changes their effort and
performance on the IAT by improving early attentional as
well as conflict monitoring processes.

	  

I-05
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN IMPULSIVENESS AND
MORAL JUDGMENTS M. Carmona-Perera, University of
Granada; J. E. Theriault, Boston College; L. Young, Boston
College; X. Sumarroca-Hernández, Hospital Nostra Senyora de
Meritxell; A. Santolaria-Rossell, Hospital Nostra Senyora de
Meritxell; A. Verdejo-García, University of Granada; M. PérezGarcía, University of Granada- Impulsivity is a central
feature of substance abuse disorders, including alcoholism
(Moeller, Barratt, Dougherty, Schmitz & Swann 2001;
Gerald & Higley, 2002; Mitchell Howard, Fields,
D'Esposito & Boettiger, 2005). Impulsivity is often
associated with impairments in decision-making,
including the discounting of future benefits (Bechara,
Damasio & Damasio, 2000; Barkley, 2001; Verdejo-García,
Pérez-García & Bechara, 2006). Here, we investigate the
impact of impulsivity on moral decision-making, in
alcoholics and non-alcoholics. We tested 31 alcoholics and
34 non-alcoholics matched in age and gender. Participants
completed a moral judgment task developed by Greene
and colleagues (Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom, Darley &
Cohen, 2001) and the Barratt Impulsivity Scale-11 (BIS,
Patton, Stanford & Barratt, 1995). We probed the
relationship between impulsiveness (i.e., cognitive, motor,
non-planning and total) and moral decision-making (e.g.,
endorsement of a harmful action for the greater good). We
found that motor impulsiveness, specifically, was
associated with utilitarian moral decisions for personal
moral dilemmas (r = 0.244; p = 0.049). These findings
reveal an association between motor impulsivity and
utilitarian moral decision-making. People who are high in
motor impulsivity are more likely to endorse immediate
actions that cause harm in the context of moral dilemmas.
I-06
ARE PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS ASSOCIATED WITH
DIMINISHED NEURAL RESPONSES TO OWN
MORAL VIOLATIONS? Ana Seara Cardoso, University
College London; Jonathan Roiser, University College London;
Catherine Sebastian, University College London; Eamon
McCrory, University College London; Essi Viding, University
College London- Adults with high levels of psychopathic
traits appear to have intact moral knowledge, but
damaged moral emotions; they seem to be able to
distinguish right from wrong, but not care about hurting
others. For example, individuals with high levels of
psychopathic
traits
show
typical
permissibility
judgements in response to standard moral dilemmas, but
report having less difficulty in making their judgements
than those with low levels of psychopathic traits. They
also show atypical brain function during moral decision
making, showing less activity in the emotion processing
areas and more reactivity in areas associated with
cognitive control and abstract reasoning. These findings
have led to the conjecture that these individuals would
rely less on emotional inputs and more on abstract
reasoning to make moral judgments. Thus, it has been
suggested that psychopathic traits are not associated with
cognitive impairments in moral knowledge, i.e. the

70	  

‘knowing’ what is wrong, but rather with impairments on
affective components of morality, i.e. the ‘feeling’ of what
is wrong. Previous research on the association between
psychopathic traits and moral processing has focused
mainly on the study of moral judgement and moral
decision-making, rather than moral emotion. Moral
emotion may be critically important in understanding
behavioural adherence to the moral rules, as they provide
immediate and salient feedback on behaviour, and thus
exert a strong influence on moral choice. In the present
study, we will use event-related fMRI to investigate the
association between psychopathic traits in the general
population and moral emotion. Thirty adult males, with
varying levels of psychopathic traits, will be tested on a
vignette task consisting of ecologically valid everyday
scenarios. Experimental scenarios portraying a moral
violation (where the subject intentionally causes harm to
another person in order to achieve a personal goal) will be
contrasted with morally neutral ones (where the subject
causes harm to himself in order to achieve the same goal).
Subjects are instructed to imagine themselves in the
situation and make online ratings of how guilty they
would feel following the action described. Conditions are
matched in terms of emotional valence and arousal,
presence of a critical other and ToM recruitment. We
predict greater activation of the amygdala, ACC, dMPFC
and lateral OFC in response to moral violation scenarios
relative to neutral ones, and expect the activation to be
positively correlated with guilt ratings on the scenarios.
We predict that levels of psychopathic traits will be
associated with overall diminished magnitude of
response, especially in the amygdala and OFC regions. An
association between diminished neural responsivity in
these regions and psychopathic traits would provide a
clearer comprehension of possible impairments in
affective components of morality, and thus of the lack of
adherence to moral rules manifested by the tendency to
antisocial behaviour often associated with these traits.

social decision making. We assumed that the on-going
inter-personal interaction may reveal different strategies
of emotion regulation. We further proposed that
individuals exhibit different patterns of neural activity
(specifically in DLPFC and Insula), depending on the
dynamic of their emotional experience during the game.
While undergoing fMRI scanning, sixty healthy male
participants played the responder in a game of 10
repeated UG-offers which were predefined to include
mostly unfair-offers. The proposer was a collaborator
instructed to negotiate aggressively and thus further
intensifying the negative emotional experience. Upon
completion of the game, outside the scanner, emotions
were reported using the Geneva Emotion Wheel, marked
for each offer, outcome and negotiation periods of the
game. Decisions made by responders extend classic results
of UG; rejection rate of unfair-offers increased to 77% and
acceptance rate of fair-offers decreased to 73.5%. Highcontrol negative (HCN) emotions (disgust, contempt,
hostility and anger) were the dominant category of
emotions experienced during the game. Indeed,
participants who reported higher average HCN emotions
ended with a lower total gain. This was not found for the
category of high-control positive (HCP) emotions (pride,
elation, happiness and satisfaction). To further investigate
this relation, we divided the participants into three groups
based on percentiles of total gain and focused on the two
groups with highest and lowest gain. Interestingly, these
results were apparent also when looking at the offer-byoffer time-course of these emotional categories indicating
a possible difference in emotional regulation strategy
along the game. When investigating the inter-offer
dynamics, both offer and negotiation periods induced
stronger HCN than HCP ratings. However, compared to
both these periods, rating of the outcome showed a
decrease in HCN and an increase in HCP emotions. This
pattern was significantly different between the two gaingroups: the high-gain-group had a much stronger increase
in HCP during the outcome period compared to the lowgain-group, in such a way that HCP was significantly
higher than HCN. This may possibly indicate that the
increase in HCP emotions in the low-gain-group (which
was still lower than HCN ratings) reflects reciprocity
and/or retribution towards the proposers’ unfair-offers,
while in the high-gain-group the pattern of emotions
reflects their general satisfaction from increasingly gaining
more money. Our novel design of a repeated bargaining
UG enabled to examine the dynamic experience of
emotions within an ecologically valid setting. The
emotional experience as it unfolded during the on-going
interaction may explain how people make decisions in a
complex social context. Furthermore, different patterns of
such experiences may reflect underlying unique neural
mechanisms of emotional regulation during decision
making (still under analysis).

I-07
HOW YOU REGULATE AFFECTS YOUR BENEFIT:
THE DYNAMIC EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE DURING
INTERACTIVE
REPEATED
ULTIMATUM
BARGAINING
EXPLAINS
SOCIAL
DECISION
MAKING
Gadi Gilam, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center; Gal Raz, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical
Center, Tel-Aviv University; Tamar Lin, Tel-Aviv University,
Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center; Rakefet Sela-Sheffy, TelAviv University; Talma Hendler, Tel-Aviv University, TelAviv Sourasky Medical Center- Emotions interact with social
decision making. This has been demonstrated in
ultimatum games (UG) where unfair-offers result in more
rejections and elicit more negative emotions than fairoffers. However, the emotional experience in real-life
bargaining in which we verbally communicate back-andforth with the same partner has not yet been investigated,
particularly in the brain. This study aimed to investigate
how the differential experience of negative emotions
elicited by repeated UG-offers influences the process of

	  

I-08
LADY JUSTICE CAN SEE: HOW DISGUST AND
ATTRIBUTION
AFFECT
RESPONSIBILITY

71	  

JUDGMENTS AND PUNISHMENT DECISIONS
Beatrice Capestany, Duke University; Lasana Harris, Duke
University- The future of a criminal defendant on trial
relies on the judgments of impartial, objective decisionmakers. How are responsibility and punishment
judgments—decisions that should be linked—affected by
the morality of the crime and the explanation of the
defendant's behavior? We use functional magnetic
resonance imaging to examine how purity violations and
dispositional attributions affect responsibility judgments
and punishment decisions, and the corresponding neural
networks. Participants read criminal dilemma vignettes
matched on severity using the Federal Sentencing
Guidelines, and were asked to rate the responsibility of
the actor and assign punishment. The vignettes depicted a
crime in either a disgust-related moral domain or not, and
a sentence describing behavior using either personality or
scientific language. Preliminary results indicate that
participants are punishing more harshly when the crime
falls into a disgust related moral domain, and are
attributing less responsibility when the actor's behavior is
characterized using a scientific explanation. Moreover,
neuroimaging results suggest modulation of neural
regions implicated in deductive reasoning (Monti et al.,
2007) and third-party punishment (Buckholtz et al., 2008)
by both disgust and dispositional attribution, suggesting
different affective and social factors bias neural
mechanisms implicated in legal decision-making.

in the Trust Game, while they actually reciprocated more
when they played as a second-mover. These results
suggest that for subjects with high Testosterone, a trustdecision entails an additional risk premium to compensate
for the potential costs of trust betrayal, leading to
diminished trusting behaviour. At the same time,
however, Testosterone enhanced reciprocity of revealed
trust. We suggest that the impact of Testosterone on the
drive to obtain and maintain social status may explain the
present findings.
I-10
EQUALITY VERSUS SELF-INTEREST IN THE BRAIN:
DIFFERENTIAL ROLES OF ANTERIOR INSULA AND
MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Claudia Civai, CNS
sector, SISSA, Italy; Cristiano Crescentini, Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Santa Maria della Misericordia; Aldo
Rustichini, University of Minnesota; Raffaella I. Rumiati, CNS
sector, SISSA, Italy- The tradeoff between equality, defined
as an equal share of resources between two similarly
deserving parties, and efficiency, considered as the
maximization of the resources available, is crucial
consideration in policy decisions. Even though an equal
outcome is generally preferred (Skitka et al, 2003),
sometimes the realization of an equitable allocation is
possible only by sacrificing the total amount of resources
available. Moreover, efficiency often overlaps with selfinterest, which competes with equality for making
decisions (Messick, 1995). In this study, we have
investigated the neural basis of individual preferences by
employing a task in which an allocation of a fixed amount
between two couple of players is randomly determined.
Specifically, the participant had to accept or reject
monetary divisions, established by a device, between: a)
the participant himself and another person A (myself –
MS- condition); b) D and E, two uninvolved third parties
(third party –TP- condition). In both conditions, players A,
D and E were not responsible for the outcome, but they
were all affected by the participant’s decision over the
outcome. Acceptance of unequal outcomes revealed a
preference for efficiency over equality; vice versa, rejection
of unequal allocations, which meant the loss of total
amount, indicated a preference for equality over
efficiency. Furthermore, in MS condition, efficiency
overlaps with self-interest in competing with equality.
Behavioral results, as expected, showed that very unequal
allocations in TP were rejected, whereas a smaller rejection
rate in MS was found when the allocation was favorable to
the subject. The first result supports the idea that
individuals prefer equal outcomes, everything else being
equal, and the second is the consequence of the
moderating effect of self-interest. As far as the neural
bases are concerned, on the one hand, anterior insula (AI),
traditionally related to negative feelings (Sanfey et al,
2003), but implicated also in more complex tasks, such as
perceptual
decision
making,
cognitive
control,
performance monitoring (Craig, 2009, for a review), and,
importantly, in norm violations (Spitzer et al, 2007; KingCasas et al, 2008), was active for unequal outcomes, in

I-09
THE
IMPACT
OF
TESTOSTERONE
ADMINISTRATION ON TRUST, RISK, BETRAYAL,
AND RECIPROCITY
Maarten A.S. Boksem, Erasmus
University Rotterdam, Radboud University Nijmegen; Pranjal
H. Mehta, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Radboud University
Nijmegen; Bram van den Bergh, Erasmus University
Rotterdam; Veerle van Son, Radboud University Nijmegen;
Alan Sanfey, Radboud University Nijmegen; Ale Smidts,
Erasmus University Rotterdam- Testosterone has been
associated with increased preferences for risk, while it is
also proposed to play an important role in social
interactions. Because trust is often regarded as ‘social risk’,
we examined whether Testosterone differentially affects
the decision to trust and the decision to take risks, by
comparing a binary-choice Trust Game with a structurally
identical, binary-choice Risk Game offering a good or a
bad outcome. We elicited subjects’ minimum acceptable
probabilities (MAPs) of recieving the good outcome such
that they would prefer the gamble to the sure payoff. Of
our 49 participants (all females), 24 received Testosterone,
while 25 received Placebo (double blind). In the
Testosterone condition, first movers state higher MAPs in
the Trust Game than in situations where nature
determines the outcome, while subjects in the Placebo
condition showed no such difference. In addition, subjects
completed a series of lottery choices and played a one-shot
Trust Game. The results revealed no difference in riskattitude. In contrast, subjects in the Testosterone condition
invested significantly less in their partners as a first-mover

	  

72	  

both TP and MS, irrespectively their advantageousness.
On the other hand, for MS unequal outcomes and
consequent MS rejections, we found an activation of a
cluster involving anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), already known in
literature for being implicated in self-referential
operations and in processing integration between
cognitive, emotional and social aspects (see Amodio &
Frith, 2006 for a review); in particular, the anterior part of
the mPFC was more active for disadvantageous outcomes
as compared to advantageous. Here, we confirmed that
equal treatment is the default norm to be applied when no
other cue triggers different principles, such as self-interest;
we propose that, as a default norm, equal treatment can
also be considered the implicitly expected outcome, and
its violation is signaled by the activation of AI. The
ACC/mPFC activation, negatively correlated to rejections,
reflects the effort to overcome the default rule of equal
split, integrating cognitive, emotional and motivational
paths in favor of a self-advantageous efficiency.

I-12
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY
BASED
CLASSIFICATION
OF
THE
PRIMARY
SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX
Filippo Migliorati,
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience; Leonardo Cerliani,
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience; Valeria Gazzola,
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience; Christian Keysers,
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience- Several fMRI studies
report activation in human parietal cortex consequent to
action observation and execution (Rizzolati et al., 1996;
Gallese et al., 1996). A possible explanation could rely on
the discovery of a mirror neuron system located in
macaque ventral premotor cortex (area F5) (Di Pellegrino
et al., 1992). Neurons belonging to this system not only fire
during action execution but also during the observation of
goal directed actions performed by other individuals
(Rizzolati et al., 1996; Gallese et al., 1996) as well as the
listening of the corresponding sound (Théoret & Pascalleone, 2002; Gazzola et al., 2006). So far, the location of
mirror activation in the parietal cortex has been assessed
by means of anatomical landmarks or with the help of
post-mortem cyto-architectonic atlases, identifying the
centres of this activity both in the Inferior Parietal Lobule
and the Somatosensory cortex (Gazzola & Keysers, 2009:
Keysers et al., 2010). It is still uncertain, though, whether
the location of the observed mirror activity in SI reflects
the actual situation or whether it is due to a mislocation
following the high inter-subjects variability in the
morphology of the parietal lobe. In a first attempt to clear
up this doubts we aimed at identifying sub-regions of the
Primary Somatosensory cortex that are functionally
connected with regions usually involved in both
observation and execution of goal directed actions, like the
dorsal and ventral premotor cortices, BA44. Our results
show that SI can be subdivided in three sub-regions
showing different pattern of preferential functional
connectivity with the chosen target ROIs, supporting the
idea that SI actually plays a role during action observation
and execution and the location of the mirror activity in SI
is not due to issues in the registration fMRI images across
subjects.

I-11
STICKING WITH THE NICE GUY: WARMTH
INFORMATION
INCREASES
FICTIVE
ERROR
DEPENDENCE FOR DECISIONS WITH PEOPLE NOT
COMPUTERS Victoria Lee, Duke University; Lasana T.
Harris, Duke University- Prior research suggests mental
state attributions to people and objects rely on separable
neural mechanisms—people activate the social cognition
network, including regions of medial prefrontal cortex
and temporal lobes (Harris, Todorov, & Fiske 2005), while
dispositional attributions to objects activate other brain
regions such as the amygdala (Harris & Fiske 2008). The
current study looks at fictive error signals in the brain
during person and computer program agent selection—
agents are selected to invest in the stock market on behalf
of participants. Participants choose an agent to invest on
their behalf based on the primary dimensions of person
perception—the ability of the agent to make a profit in the
stock market (agent competence) or the agents’ generosity
in returning a profit (agent warmth). Using a perseverance
index—the amount of time participants relied on fictive
error signals—we observed a significant interaction
between agent and person perception dimension.
Specifically participants depended on fictive error signals
more when investing with warm human agents compared
to ability or computers. The striatum and pACC, neural
regions implicated in fictive error processing, were
modulated by the identity of the investor, suggesting that
these signals are sensitive to the primary dimensions of
person perception. Furthermore, the separate social
cognition systems described above for humans and nonhumans were modulated by fictive error signals to people
and computers respectively. We discuss these results in
the context of an integrative theory of social cognition and
decision-making.

	  

I-13
USING THE BRAIN TO PREDICT REAL-WORLD
TRENDS IN MAINSTREAM FILM RELEASES Benjamin
C. Gunter, University of California, Los Angeles; B. Locke
Welborn, University of California, Los Angeles; I. Stephanie
Vezich, University of California, Los Angeles; Martin M.
Monti, University of California, Los Angeles; Matthew D.
Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles- fMRI-based
estimates of neural activity in medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) during the
presentation of persuasive and advertising stimuli have
been previously shown to predict future behavioral
change in the participants more accurately than self-report
(Falk et al., 2010). Accordingly, the utility of “neural focus
groups” as a medium for enhanced estimates of
population-level effectiveness in advertising campaigns
has been of increasing interest (Falk et al., under review).

73	  

We sought to use neural focus group methodology to
predict future trends in a market and patterns of reception
among consumers and critics. We scanned 29 participants
while they watched trailers (previews) advertising
unreleased mainstream films. Afterward, participants
provided their own liking ratings and estimates of the
film’s success in the mainstream. After extracting subjectlevel BOLD estimates for each film from regions of interest
(including mPFC and PCC), we correlated both neural and
behavioral estimates with the mainstream success of the
films (as indexed by box office returns) and with critical
reception (as indexed by online aggregations of critical
reviews). We hypothesize that mPFC signal change will
predict the box office success of the films more accurately
than self-report alone. Analyses will continue as the tested
films are released and critical reviews appear. Results will
contribute to a framework for neural models predicting a
variety of real-world events beyond the capacity of selfreport by laymen and even experts.

not moderated by task-relevance, valence or arousal.
However, the repetition effect was largest between the
very first and second picture presentation of the
experiment. Psychometric personality traits had no
systematic effect on LPP amplitudes. However, an
interesting interaction emerged between state level
individual differences, task-relevance and affective
content. Participants who reported being more aroused
by all images had a more pronounced rise in mean
amplitudes from first to third repetition block in the
indirect task condition in response to aversive stimuli.
Meanwhile participants giving lower arousal ratings
showed no increase at all (r = .37, p < .01). The repetition
effect found in this study can be speculatively related to
the well-documented enhancement of late posterior ERP-s
by conscious recollection. The gradual increase in LPP
amplitudes may therefore reflect memory processes being
activated by recognition of previously presented stimuli.
Viewed in this framework it can be speculated that in a
situation where affect is task-irrelevant participants with
higher affective sensitivity show enhanced memory for
threatening stimuli while their less sensitive counterparts
somehow attenuate recollection, possibly by effectively
down-regulating their affective reactions. If future
research validates this explanation, repetitions of affective
stimuli with an indirect task may become a useful tool for
studying individual differences in affective memory as
well as emotion regulation.

I-14
TASK-IRRELEVANCE
AND
STIMULUS
REPETITIONS REVEAL INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
IN THE LATE POSITIVE POTENTIAL Helen Uibo,
University of Tartu, Estonia; Andero Uusberg, University of
Tartu, Estonia; Kairi Kreegipuu, University of Tartu, Estonia;
Jüri Allik, University of Tartu, Estonia- The Late Positive
Potential (LPP) differentiates emotional especially highly
arousing evolutionary significant stimuli from neutral
ones. This modulation seems to be a robust index of
affective processes. It is insensitive to various physical
stimulus characteristics (color, brightness, figure-ground
relationships etc) and also appears to be resistant to
habituation. Even after excessive repetitions LPP reliably
differentiates emotional stimuli from neutral ones with
only a small overall attenuation. Finally, the affective
amplification of LPP amplitudes does not depend on taskrelevance. The aims of the present study are a) to explore
the combined effects of task relevance and stimulus
repetition on affective modulation of LPP amplitudes and
b) to study their interactions with state (subjective
affective picture ratings) and trait (Big Five personality)
level individual differences. 79 participants (32 males)
viewed affective images (IAPS) from five different
categories (aversive, negative, neutral, positive and erotic)
in a direct (making affective evaluations) and an indirect
(making non-affective evaluations) task condition. For
each task 60 pictures were presented in randomized order
within three blocks. LPP mean amplitudes over centralparietal region were analyzed between 320 and 1500 ms.
Task-relevance increased LPP amplitudes uniformly
across affective as well as neutral images, but only if
affective task was completed after non-affective. This
carryover effect suggests that once attention has been
drawn to affective content, analysis of emotional meaning
will continue on the same level even without explicit task
requirements. We observed a gradual rise of mean
amplitudes from first to third repetition block, which to
our knowledge is a novel result. This amplification was

	  

I-15
AN
FMRI
STUDY
ON
ATTITUDINAL
AMBIVALENCE: THE MICROSOFT PARADOX Sarah
Henderson, Dartmouth College; Catherine J. Norris, Dartmouth
College- The experience of co-occurring positive and
negative emotions (i.e., ambivalence) is a complex and
poorly understood aspect of the human experience. One
barrier
towards
understanding
the
underlying
mechanisms of ambivalence is the difficulty in producing
and manipulating this phenomenon in a laboratory setting
when individuals differ greatly on what they experience
as ambivalent. The current study, therefore, sought to
understand the cognitive and emotional processes that
underlie ambivalence by utilizing a paradigm that
allowed for idiographic analyses of individual differences
in attitudes towards well known company brands. Using
functional
magnetic
resonance
imaging
(fMRI),
participants viewed Interbrand’s 2009 Best Global Brands
(n = 100) for 4 sec each and indicated whether they liked
or disliked each brand. Following the fMRI task,
participants rated their positive and negative feelings
about each brand. We calculated ambivalence scores for
each brand and used each participant’s ratings to create an
ideal time series based on the amount of reported
ambivalence. We conducted a whole-brain analysis to find
areas of the brain in which the time series of neural
activity correlated with the ideal time series. We found a
high correlation between the real and ideal time series in
the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC; BA 10) and medial
orbitofrontal cortex (MOFC; BA 11). MPFC activity has

74	  

been suggested to support attention to one’s own
emotions and mental states (i.e., self-processing), and
MOFC is implicated in affective decision making.
Therefore, results suggest that attitudinal ambivalence
correlates with activation of these regions, indicating that
greater levels of ambivalence may require more
processing resources. We also found correlated activity in
bilateral ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC; BA 47),
posterior cingulate cortex, and left parahippocampal
gyrus, all regions that have been suggested to support
memory retrieval. This could suggest that the resolution of
ambivalence (i.e., deciding whether a brand is liked or
disliked) either requires greater memory retrieval, or that
perhaps a greater quantity and variety of memories gives
rise to greater ambivalence. Finally, we found that greater
ambivalence correlated with activity in bilateral visual
cortex and precuneus, suggesting greater visual and
attentional processing for ambivalent brands. Overall,
these findings shed light on the processes and
mechanisms underlying not only consumer ambivalence
towards well-known brands, but also the overall
experience of ambivalence and how it ultimately impacts
decision-making.

50% of total. Only participants with positive area
estimates were included in the relevant analyses. The
mean amplitudes were most sensitive to erotic stimuli.
Significant enhancements compared to the neutral
waveform were generated by erotic images in EPN, erotic
followed by aversive in P3 and these two followed by
negative in SW. Meanwhile the affective modulation of
component time courses was quite different. The P3
peaked sooner for both high arousal positive as well as
negative categories. By contrast the SW dynamics were
prolonged for aversive as well as moderately arousing
negative stimuli followed by erotic ones. These findings
suggest that latency (i.e. waveform shape) can be used to
differentiate the P3 and Slow Wave processes even if
amplitudes cannot. Doing so might complement the
theoretical distinction between the EPN reflecting preattentive prioritisation of motivationally relevant
information and the LPP reflecting the actual prioritized
processing. The findings of this study suggest the P3 and
SW may index distinct phases of the latter such as initial
deployment of capacity-limited resources and prolonged
processing including cognitive appraisals and emotion
regulation, respectively.

I-16
HARNESSING VISUAL ERP-S FOR AFFECTIVE
CHRONOMETRY Andero Uusberg, University of Tartu,
Estonia; Helen Uibo, University of Tartu, Estonia; Riti Tiimus,
University of Tartu, Estonia; Kairi Kreegipuu, University of
Tartu, Estonia; Jüri Allik, University of Tartu, Estonia- With
the hallmark advantage of high temporal resolution,
event-related potentials (ERP) seem perfect for the
investigation of affective chronometry. However,
discerning the temporal structure of visual affective ERP-s
is far from trivial. On a larger scale, clear definitions of
affective ERP components remain to be agreed upon.
Meanwhile on a smaller scale the traditional peak latency
measure is both conceptually questionable and unreliable
on slow processes such as the Late Positive Potential
(LPP). As a result the functional correlates of affective
waveform sections remain vague. Here we test two
strategies for harnessing the temporal sensitivity of ERP-s
in affective neuroscience – identification of component
from affective difference waves and measuring their
latencies using fractional area estimates. EEG was
recorded while 80 subjects viewed two sets of 60 IAPS
images from five affective categories (aversive, negative,
neutral, positive and erotic) with direct and indirect tasks.
While the former task required participants to rate the
valence and arousal of each picture, the latter involved
evaluating brightness and object numerosity thus
rendering affective content task-irrelevant. A maximum
difference envelope was used to define three affective
components: dipolar Early Posterior Negativity (EPN) and
unipolar P3 and Slow Wave (SW). Component amplitudes
were analysed using windowed averages from
representative electrode pairs. Fractional area latencies
were defined for the uniformly positive P3 and SW as
points in time when the area under the waveform reaches

	  

I-17
THE UNCERTAINTY BIAS: BRAIN EVIDENCE THAT
AMBIGUITY IS MORE CAPTIVATING THAN
THREAT OR REWARD Shona M. Tritt, University of
Toronto; Jordan B. Peterson, University of Toronto; Michael
Inzlicht, University of Toronto- A large body of research has
focused on the types of stimuli that most capture and
sustain human attention. Much of this work has
concentrated on preferential processing of negatively
compared to positively valenced motivationally-relevant
stimuli. Here, however, we suggest that valence may be
less motivationally-relevant than certainty, and predict
that uncertain stimuli will attract more attention that
either positive or negative stimuli. We test this by
examining the late positive potential (LPP), which is an
evoked brain potential that varies in amplitude with
emotional arousal. Undergraduate participants (N = 41)
viewed images of smiling (positive stimuli), frowning
(negative stimuli), or smiling and frowning facial
expressions of the same individual morphed together
(uncertain stimuli). Results indicate that uncertain images
yielded significantly greater LPP amplitudes than positive
and negative images; all of which are greater than neutral
non-face images. The results suggest that humans have an
evolutionary-based attentional bias that is greater to
uncertainty than to threatening or pleasant information.
I-18
FACING YOUR FEARS: A BEHAVIORAL AND
NEUROIMAGING EXPLORATION OF THE ROLE OF
TRAIT ANXIETY IN IGNORING IRRELEVANT FEAR
EXPRESSIONS. Nook, E., Columbia University; Satpute, A.
B., Columbia University; Narayanan, S., Columbia University;
Weber, J., Columbia University; Ochsner, K. N., Columbia
University- Anxiety can be an adaptive psychological state

75	  

that facilitates one’s responses to affective information in
the environment. However, in its extremes, anxiety is a
debilitating illness that allows such information to
undermine cognitive control. This occurs whenever
affectively salient information that is irrelevant to the task
at hand is not effectively ignored, allowing it to interfere
with one’s current goals. In this study, we used a
parametric design and functional magnetic resonance
imaging techniques to investigate the behavioral and
neural correlates of the ability to ignore increasing levels
of irrelevant affective information and to explore how trait
anxiety affects this ability. Twenty participants were
scanned while they viewed faces that were morphed to
vary in affective intensity (five levels, from calm to
fearful), and to range on a non-affective perceptual
dimension (five levels, from centered to tilted).
Participants judged either the amount of affect or tilt of the
faces. Even though the fearfulness of the expression was
irrelevant to judging the tilt, participants on average took
longer to judge a face’s tilt as the fearfulness of the face
increased, suggesting that affectively salient information
interfered with task goals. Moreover, the degree to which
individuals’
response
times
slowed
correlated
significantly with their trait anxiety scores, suggesting that
one’s ability to exert cognitive control to ignore affective
information was more disrupted for individuals with high
trait
anxiety.
Tracking
the
behavioral
effects,
neuroimaging results showed that increasing fearfulness
while judging tilt elicited activation of the prefrontal
cortex and deactivation of the insula and that regions of
the prefrontal cortex were less active for individuals with
high trait anxiety when completing this task. These
results support current themes in the field suggesting that
ignoring salient affective information may rely on
prefrontal regions to down-regulate the responses of
affective sensitive regions and that anxiety interferes with
this regulation.

the temporal pattern of this learning differed. Robust
differential fear learning was observed early in the
acquisition session for unaware participants, but only
during late acquisition for aware participants. A second
experiment investigated whether this nonconscious
learning would persist one day later. We found that fear
associations can develop outside of awareness, and that
the magnitude of this learning does not differ significantly
from that of conscious fear learning, but unlike conscious
conditioned fear that develops and is known to persist
over time, nonconscious conditioned fear is acquired
rapidly and quickly diminishes. Thus, the initial orienting
response that allows a stimulus to be associated with
threat may not require awareness, but the formation of a
stable association that endures over time does.

★

I-20
THE ANXIETY-REDUCING POWER OF BELIEF:
CONTEMPLATING
BELIEF
SYSTEMS
IS
ASSOCIATED WITH LOWER ERN AMPLITUDE Alexa
Tullett, The University of Toronto; Aaron Kay, Duke
University; Michael Inzlicht, The University of TorontoUncertainty makes us anxious. It is often suggested that
belief systems are adaptive because they provide an
explanation for the events that occur in our lives – they
assure us that the world is not a random place. In three
studies, we explored the link between belief systems and
neuroaffective markers of anxiety. In the first study,
religious participants were brought into the lab and were
asked to either write about what their religion means to
them, or to write about their favorite season (a pleasant
but non-religious control condition). Afterwards,
participants completed a computerized reaction-time task
while their brain activity was monitored using
electroencephalography (EEG). In particular, we focused
on a brainwave known as the error-related negativity
(ERN), which occurs when people make mistakes. The
amplitude of the ERN reflects, in part, people’s emotional
reactions to their errors, and can thus be seen as an index
of anxious reactivity. We found that participants who
wrote about their religion had significantly smaller ERNs
than those who wrote about a season, suggesting that
religious beliefs can have anxiety-reducing effects. In a
second study, we investigated whether implicit religious
primes would have the same effects, and also whether
these effects would extend to non-religious people.
Participants completed a word-scramble task that
included either religious words (i.e. “divine” or
“prophet”) or neutral words. For religious participants,
the results replicated our findings from Study 1, showing
that implicit religious primes were associated with
reduced ERN amplitudes compared to control primes. For
non-religious subjects, however, the religious primes had
the opposite effect, causing greater ERN amplitude
relative to control primes. These findings suggest that
religious belief systems may be comforting, but only for
those who subscribe to them. In our third study, we aimed
to explore whether belief systems that are not explicitly

I-19
NONCONSCIOUS FEAR IS RAPIDLY ACQUIRED
AND FORGOTTEN Candace Raio, New York University;
David Carmel, New York University; Marisa Carrasco, New
York University; Elizabeth A. Phelps, New York UniversityThreatening stimuli can gain preferential access to
affective processing, eliciting fear-related physiological
and neural responses even when presented outside of
awareness. It remains unclear, however, whether an
entirely new fear association can be acquired without
awareness of the conditioned stimuli. Here, two groups of
participants underwent classical fear conditioning. One
group was aware of the conditioned stimuli, while the
other had the same conditioned stimuli suppressed from
awareness using a technique called continuous flash
suppression (CFS), in which images presented to one eye
are rendered invisible by salient dynamic stimulation of
the other eye. One suppressed stimulus (CS+) was
occasionally paired with a mild shock, whereas the other
(CS-) was never paired with shock. We found significantly
greater responding to the CS+ in both groups, although

	  

76	  

religious might also have anxiety-reducing effects.
Participants read one of three passages expressing the
following ideas: 1) things happen for a reason that we are
capable of comprehending, 2) things happen for a reason
that is beyond our comprehension, and 3) things happen
randomly. Subsequently we assessed ERN amplitude
during a computerized reaction-time task. We found that
when participants were told that events in the world
happen randomly they had higher ERNs relative to
participants who read about an orderly world. Taken
together, these findings suggest that belief systems,
whether religious or not, that enforce the orderliness of
the world we live in can shield us from anxiety.

I-22
STUDY OF SEX DIFFERENCE TO A PSYCHOSOCIAL
STRESS RESPONSE:
A NEUROPSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
Annie Duchesne, McGill University; Cory Cooperman, McGill
University; Jens C Pruessner, McGill UniversityBackground: An important condition of health and wellbeing is determined by our adaptability. Physiologically,
adaptation can be characterized by the synchronized and
coordinated activation of endocrine and autonomic stress
systems. Sex and gender are preponderant modulating
factors of the stress response. Differences between men
and women’s stress response have been reported at the
neural, physiological and psychological levels, however
the directionality of these differences often varies
according to paradigm use, menstrual cycle assessment
and varying stress biomarkers. The main goal of the
current study was to assess sex and gender differences in
stress responses by systematically looking at neural,
physiological and psychological measures. Methods: Men
(n=16) and groups of women in either the follicular (n=21)
or luteal (n=14) phase of their menstrual cycle (mean age
20,5 years) were exposed to the Montreal Imaging Stress
Task (MIST). The MIST consisted of two sessions of 12
minutes of challenging arithmetic tasks in which the
success rate is maintained at 25–40%, while the subject is
told to expect 80 a 90% correct answers. The perception of
failure to the task was supplemented by direct evaluative
feedback provided by an investigator in between the two
sessions. Salivary cortisol and alpha amylase (AA, a
biomarker of the autonomic nervous system) were
measured throughout the experiment, together with pre
and post task self esteem. All subjects were scanned in a 3
T Siemens Magnetom scanner. Results: Neuroimaging
results will be presented at the conference. Endocrine
stress response revealed and significant effect of time
(F(2.349,112.738) 9.789 p< 0.01) where cortisol levels 15, 30
and 45 min after task initiation were significantly higher
compared to baseline levels (all p< 0.05). Levels of AA
revealed a significant time by group interaction
(F(5.837,140.099) 2.447 p=0.029) where men had decreased
levels of AA as opposed to the two groups of women who
showed an increase in AA levels 15 min after task
initiation (all p< 0.05). Analysis of the area under the
increase (AUCi) for AA levels revealed a significant effect
of group (F(2,51) 6.285 p=0.004); pairwise comparisons
demonstrated that women in their luteal phases produced
larger increase in AA levels in response to the stress
paradigm compared to both groups (all p< 0.05). A
significant reduction in perceived social self esteem was
also observed following task exposure (F(1,27)= 13.139, p=
0.001). Interestingly, a significant correlations emerged
between physiological and psychological stress variables
only in the group of men, where AA AUCi was negatively
related with social self esteem scores following the task
exposure (r -.622 p=0.01). Conclusions: The current study
will provide insightful information on the relation
between physiological and psychological stress processing
at the neurological levels. To this point, physiological and

I-21
GUM CHEWING INHIBITS THE PROPAGATION OF
STRESS-RELATED INFORMATION IN A BRAIN
STRESS NETWORK Hongbo Yu, Peking University; Xi
Chen, Peking University; Jinting Liu, Peking University;
Xiaolin Zhou, Peking University- Stress is prevalent in
human life and threatens both physical and mental health.
Coping with stress therefore is of great importance in
survival and well-being. Gum chewing has been proven
by both behavioral and physiological studies to be an
effective way of mitigating stress. Two kinds of
mechanism have been proposed for this function: gum
chewing improves attention and cognitive functions and
thus helps the chewers to concentrate on the task and
ignore the stressor; alternatively, gum chewing has
positive influences on mood regulation during the
processing of stressor, alleviating the experienced stress
(Scholey, 2008; Scholey et al., 2009; Smith, 2009a, 2009b).
However, the neural basis of the anti-stress functions of
gum chewing is not clear. Here we used loud noise as an
acute stressor and investigated how stress is relieved by a
popular coping behavior, namely, gum chewing. In a
function magnetic resonance imaging study, we presented
participants with noise and asked them to rate their
feeling of stress under gum chewing and no chewing
conditions. The participants generally felt more stressful
when hearing noise, but less so when they were chewing
gum. The bilateral superior temporal sulcus (STS) and the
left anterior insula (AI) were activated by noise and the
activity showed a positive correlation with participants’
self-report of stress feeling. Critically, gum chewing
significantly reduced the noise-induced activation in these
areas. Psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis
showed that the functional connectivity between the left
AI and the bilateral STS and that between the left AI and
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) were increased by
noise to a less extent when the participants were chewing
gum than when they were not chewing. Dynamic
causality modeling (DCM) analysis demonstrated that
gum chewing inhibited the connectivity from the STS to
the AI. These findings demonstrate that gum chewing
relieves stress by attenuating the sensory processing of
external stressor and by inhibiting the propagation of
stress-related information in the brain stress network.

	  

77	  

psychological variables revealed that all groups were
significantly stressed by the procedure. While moderate
group differences were found between groups, significant
relation between psychophysiological stress measures
seemed to be strictly observed in men. This systematic
approach allows a better understanding of sex differences
on the stress response.

Mujica-Parodi, State University of New York at Stony Brook;
Eddie Harmon-Jones, Texas A&M University; Greg Hajcak,
State University of New York at Stony Brook- The capture of
spatial attention by environmental threat is a central
component of the fear response. This attention bias to
threat is so strong that it occurs even when awareness has
been restricted through the use of backward masking.
However, research suggests that unrestricted/unmasked
and restricted/masked threat cues modulate spatial
attention through different mechanisms: disengagement
and orienting, respectively. The serotonin transporter gene
polymorphism (5HTTLPR) has been linked to one’s
allocation of attention to unmasked threat signals. Yet, the
association between the 5HTTLPR gene and nonconscious
biases to masked threat is unknown, and it is unclear if
such biases might be driven by facilitated orienting or
delayed disengagement. Fifty-one participants were
genotyped (41 Short allele carriers and 10 homozygous
long individuals) and performed a dot-probe task with
backward masked fearful and neutral faces. Fearfulneutral, neutral-fearful, or neutral-neutral faces were
simultaneously presented (33ms) to the left and right of
fixation and immediately masked by happy faces (100ms).
A dot then appeared either on the left or right of the
screen and participants responded to the location of the
dot. This dot could either be spatially congruent or
incongruent with the fearful face. Average reaction time
differences between congruent and incongruent trials
reflect participants’ overall capture of attention by
nonconscious threat. Differences between congruent and
neutral-neutral trials reflect orienting effects, while
differences between incongruent and neutral-neutral
reflect disengagement effects. A post-task awareness check
confirmed that processing of these faces was below the
level of conscious awareness. Fifty out of 51 participants
performed at chance in this task. Only those performing at
chance we used for dot-probe analysis (40 S-carrier and 10
LL). Dot-probe results suggest that backward masked
fearful faces captured spatial attention in short-allele
carriers of the 5HTTLPR and this capture of attention was
driven by a nonconscious orienting to threat. Conversely,
homozygous long individuals tended to direct attention
away from masked fearful faces. Thus, the short allele of
the 5HTTLPR appears to be a mechanism in which spatial
attention is automatically shifted toward nonconscious
threat signals. This rapid shifting of attention to threat is
adaptive; however, excessive negative attention bias is
associated with anxiety. In contrast, the long allele may act
to promote resilience to stress and anxiety by biasing one’s
attention away from nonconscious threats.

I-23
THE EFFECT OF ACUTE STRESS EXPOSURE ON
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
PAVLOVIAN
CONDITIONING Andrea H. Lewis, Rutgers University;
Anthony J. Porcelli, Marquette University; Meredith P.
Johnson, Rutgers University; Mauricio R. Delgado, Rutgers
University- While much is known about the neural
circuitry associated with Pavlovian conditioning, there is
some ambiguity as to how this pattern of activation
changes when learning occurs under stress. Past research
suggests that stress may enhance (e.g. Shors et al., 1992) or
impair (e.g. Wolf et al., 2009) conditioning, and its effect
may vary as a function of gender (Stark et al., 2006; Wood
& Shors, 1998). The current study was designed to
examine the effect of acute stress exposure on Pavlovian
conditioning using secondary reinforcers. The task
utilized a between-subjects design, such that half of the
participants were exposed to cold stress and the remaining
participants were exposed to a no-stress control
procedure. Cortisol samples were obtained immediately
prior to each stress or control procedure application.
During the task, participants were shown four different
geometric shapes (conditioned stimuli, CS), each of which
was paired with a specific financial outcome. Outcomes
varied with respect to valence (i.e. monetary gain or loss)
and magnitude (i.e. high or low magnitude). A partial
reinforcement procedure was used such that participants
received a financial outcome on 50% of the trials; in the
remaining 50% of trials the CS was paired with no
outcome. At the end of each of each block, participants
rated their liking of each CS on a 4-point Likert scale.
Behavioral ratings provided confirmation that participants
correctly learned the valence and magnitude of the CSoutcome contingencies, although rate of learning did not
differ between the stress and no-stress groups in an initial
sample. Preliminary neuroimaging data suggest that
BOLD signal differs as a function of acute stress exposure
when processing CS associated with monetary gain and
loss. A magnitude effect was also present such that acute
stress led to an increase in BOLD signal in affective
learning regions of the brain including ventral striatum
and amygdala when viewing a CS associated with high
monetary gain as compared to low monetary gain. Future
analyses will focus on temporal changes in BOLD signal
as a function of learning and acute stress exposure.

I-25
TAKING ACTION IN THE FACE OF FEAR:
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN HUMAN ACTIVE
AVOIDANCE Katherine A. Collins, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine; Michael A. Canete, Mount Sinai School of Medicine;
Christopher K. Cain, Nathan Klein Institute for Psychiatric
Research, New York University; Daniela Schiller, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine- Background: Active avoidance learning

I-24
NONCONSCIOUS ORIENTING OF ATTENTION TO
THREAT IS ASSOCIATED WITH VARIATION IN THE
SEROTONIN TRANSPORTER GENE Joshua M. Carlson,
State University of New York at Stony Brook; Lilianne R.

	  

78	  

(AA) is the acquisition of behavior that minimizes
exposure to danger. Most rodents exhibit AA, but some
display only automatic fear reactions (freezing). AA
deficits are associated with an “anxious” phenotype in
animals. Patients with anxiety disorders often exhibit
excessive inhibitory avoidance behavior, but the
relationship between anxiety and AA in humans is
unclear. To understand why some people can take action
while others are “paralyzed” when faced with fear, we
aimed to create a task that permitted observation of interindividual variability in human AA. Methods: During
the experiment, participants moved a marker within a
virtual game-board divided into two compartments by a
narrow “bridge”. Every three seconds, a lightening bolt
image would appear if the player had not crossed the
“bridge” in that time period. The bolt was paired with
mild electric shock in one third of trials. To avoid all bolts
and shocks, a participant had to cross the “bridge” two
times per trial. Results: Our task successfully identified
“good” and “poor” performers in a sample of 28 healthy
volunteers. “Good” performers made significantly more
avoidance responses than “poor” performers, who
evinced slower reaction times in late versus early trials.
“Poor” performers reported significantly higher levels of
state and trait anxiety.
Conclusions: We developed a
novel probe of human AA that is the first to identify a
subset of poor performers who report significantly higher
levels of anxiety. Future studies may elucidate the neural
mechanisms of both AA and anxiety disorders.

of red balls (punishment). Additionally, uncontrolled
events of random rewards and punishments allowed for
separation of intentional, incentive motivational processes
from unintentional (hedonic) neural response to random
rewards and punishments. Following the scan, subjects
filled the Sensitivity to Punishment and Sensitivity to
Reward Questionnaire (SPSRQ). In order to functionally
identify our pre-determined regions of interest (ROIs):
PAG, amygdala and NAc; a whole brain General Linear
Model analysis including four regressors (controlled and
uncontrolled reward and punishment events) was
conducted. Spearman correlation was calculated between
regressors of controlled reward/punishment and SR/SP
trait scores. We found that the activation of the key
motivational ROIs during controlled events was
differentially related to the motivational personality traits:
for the PAG, during rewarding events activation increased
with higher SP scores (r=0.593, p=0.033), whereas during
punishment, increased activation was associated with
lower scores in SR (r=-0.649, p=0.016). For the NAc,
increased activation during rewarding events was
associated with higher RS scores (r= 0.526, p=0.0325),
while at the same time these higher RS scores were also
associated with decreased activation of the amygdala
during punishing events (r= -0.845, p<0.001). Our results
suggest that personality traits of motivation differentially
relate to neural responses to the 'wanting' attribute of
reward and punishment in previously indicated
motivation systems. As expected, the PAG correlated with
sensitivity to punishment, even during rewarding events,
supporting the idea that activity in a threat system
mediates such tendency. However, an opposite relations
were observed for Nacc and Amygdala, presumably
nodes of different motivation systems, with regard to
sensitivity to reward. This suggests that the balance
between these regions determine the overall personality
tendency toward potential gains. Our results unveil the
neural underpinnings of individual differences by
applying a mechanistic rather than a descriptive approach.

I-26
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERSONALITY
BASED MOTIVATED BEHAVIOR. Tal Gonen, Tel Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv University; Eran Eldar,
Princeton University; Talma Hendler, Tel Aviv Sourasky
Medical Center, Tel Aviv University- Motivation is a psychobehavioral concept regarding the drive to facilitate or
inhibit behavior in response to environmental incentives
and threats. Basic motivation tendencies were theorized to
be mediated by specific brain nodes including the Nucleus
Accumbence (NAc), facilitating response to gains; and the
Peri Aquaductal Grey (PAG) and amygdala, facilitating
response to threat and losses. These behavioral tendencies
were further conceptualized as core personality traits of
Sensitivity to Reward (SR) and to Punishment (SP).
However, since reinforcements (both appetitive and
aversive) carry the hedonic value of pleasure (i.e. ‘liking’),
along with motivational value of incentive (i.e. ‘wanting’),
it is not fully clear which of these reinforcing attributes is
reflected by the corresponding personality traits. This
study aimed to extract the neural correlates of intentional
motivated response to reinforcements (i.e. incentive
motivation) and elucidate the relation between the neural
activation of key regions related to these motivational
processes and the SR/SP personality traits. We conducted
an fMRI study among healthy participants, using a novel
competitive computer game which was constructed to
manipulate approach and avoidance tendencies. The goal
of the game is to catch money coins (reward), and to avoid

	  

I-28
ENDOCRINE, NEURAL, AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL EVALUATIVE THREAT IN
A SUBCLINICAL DEPRESSION SAMPLE
Katarina
Dedovic, University of California, Los Angeles; Veronika
Engert, Max Planck Institute Leipzig; Annie Duchesne, McGill
University; Sonja Damika Lue, McGill University; Julie
Andrews, McGill University; Simona I. Efanov, McGill
University; Thomas Beaudry, McGill University; Jens C.
Pruessner, McGill University- Depression has been
associated with maladaptive psychological and endocrine
responses to social stressors. However, it is unclear
whether this pattern of dysregulation is present prior to
onset of clinical depression. The present study aimed to
investigate whether healthy young adults with varying
levels of depressive tendencies, at a subclinical level, may
already show dysregulation of the subjective and
endocrine stress response and the corresponding
regulatory neural networks, when exposed to a mild

79	  

psychosocial challenge. Based on depression scores
derived from standard questionnaires, healthy young
adults were sorted into a control (N=27), a subclinical
(N=23), or a high-risk subclinical group (N=9). The
subjects completed two runs of the modified Montreal
Imaging Stress Task (MIST), which combines mental
arithmetic task with social evaluative threat (SET). The
participants also completed state social and performance
self-esteem measures pre- and post-MIST, and provided
saliva samples for cortisol analysis throughout the testing
session. Analysis of self-esteem data revealed that, in all
participants, performance self-esteem levels significantly
decreased following the MIST (F(1,53)=15.2, p<.001). With
respect to cortisol, there was a tendency for a time x group
interaction, F(4.6, 121.05)=2.08, p=.08), and a significant
group effect (F(2.53)=3.63,p=.03). Analysis of group
differences in endocrine and neural data showed that the
subclinical group had an overall lower cortisol output
during the testing session (p=.046), and a greater change
in signal intensity in the right occipital lobe in response to
SET (cluster thresholded, p<.05 corrected), compared to
the control group. Furthermore, the control and the
subclinical group showed significant deactivation in the
medial orbitofrontal region in response to SET processing
(cluster thresholded, p<.05 corrected), which was absent
in the high-risk subclinical group. The present findings
suggest that while all subjects internalized negative
feedback (by showing a decrease in performance selfesteem), subclinical and high-risk groups did show
differential endocrine and neural patterns compared to the
control group and to each other in response to the MIST
session. Although the lack of cortisol stress response in
controls limits interpretation of findings, the results seem
to suggest that dysregulation of both the endocrine profile
and neural networks involved in processing of SET may
be present even prior to onset of clinical levels of
depression.

Weissman et al, 1976), social and physical anhedonia
(Chapman Revised Physical and Social Anhedonia Scales;
Chapman et al., 1976) and social anxiety (Social Anxiety
Scale for Adolescents; LaGreca et al., 1998). In a subgroup
of 14 CHR patients from whom high spatial resolution
functional magnetic resonance imaging data was
available, we assessed correlations between these
psychological measures and basal metabolic activity (as
indicated by cerebral blood volume) in striatal subregions,
the amygdala and related basal forebrain, and the
orbitofrontal and subcallosal cingulate cortices, all nodes
of circuits hypothesized to mediate reward processing
and/or learned and generalized fear. RESULTS: Relative
to healthy controls, CHR patients showed significantly
poorer social adjustment, higher social and physical
anhedonia, and higher social anxiety, exhibiting levels
comparable to those observed in schizophrenia patients.
Regression models revealed total anhedonia predicted
social
adjustment
impairment.
Anhedonia
was
significantly and negatively correlated with basal
metabolic activity states within orbitofrontal cortex and
the anterior caudate. DISCUSSION: Both anhedonia and
social anxiety are prominent in patients at high clinical
risk for schizophrenia. Trait anhedonia may be a
particularly
informative
core
phenotype
which,
independent of symptoms, predicts social impairment.
The current study provides a rationale for targeting these
processes and activity in related paralimbic frontal corticostriatal circuits in interventions for the psychosis risk
syndrome. Drs. Holly Moore and Cheryl Corcoran are
joint senior authors for this presentation.
I-30
AFFECT REACTION TIME AND RESTING STATE
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX ACTIVITY LEVEL
IN VETERANS WITH AND WITHOUT POST
TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (PTSD)
Francis
Stevens, Emmanuel College; Cortney McCormick, W. G. (Bill)
Hefner Veterans Affairs Medical Center; Robin Hurley, W. G.
(Bill) Hefner Veterans Affairs Medical Center; Courtney
Haswell, Durham Veterans Affairs Medical Center; Rajendra
Morey, Durham Veterans Affairs Medical Center; Katherine
Taber, W. G. (Bill) Hefner Veterans Affairs Medical CenterPrevious research has shown that anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) appears to be under activated in PTSD (Etkin &
Wager, 2007). The anterior cingulate cortex lies in the
medial wall of each cerebral hemisphere, beneath the
frontal lobe and considered to be part of the limbic lobe
positioned above amygdala and adjacent to the corpus
callosum. The ACC is considered to be involved in the
regulation of emotion generated in limbic system areas
(Etkin, et al 2006; Ochsner, et al 2002). Individuals with
PSTD show difficulty maintaining sustained attention
(Vasterling, et al 2002), and this inability maintain
constant attention has been seen across most all PTSD
studies (Bremner, 2004). The ability to attend and focus is
considered to be a primary function of the ACC
(Weissman et al, 2005). Research further suggests that
ACC is specifically important in attending to and

I-29
CONTRIBUTIONS OF SOCIAL ANHEDONIA AND
SOCIAL
ANXIETY
TO
IMPAIRED
SOCIAL
ADJUSTMENT IN THE PUTATIVE SCHIZOPHRENIA
PRODROME Victoria Cressman, Columbia University; Scott
Schobel, Columbia University; Sara Steinfield, Columbia
University; Shelly Ben-David, Columbia University; Scott
Small, Columbia University; Holly Moore, Columbia
University;
Cheryl
Corcoran,
Columbia
UniversityBACKGROUND:
Poor social function is a core
characteristic of schizophrenia and its risk states, yet it is
poorly understood and refractory to treatment. In this
study, we examined trait anhedonia as assessed with the
Chapman scale, as well as social anxiety, as processes
potentially contributing to social impairment in the
schizophrenia risk syndrome. We also explored potential
neural correlates of social adjustment and its affective
component processes. METHODS: In 50 patients at
clinical high risk (CHR) for psychosis and 29 age- and sexappropriate healthy controls, we measured social
adjustment (Social Adjustment Scale Self-Report Scale;

	  

80	  

processing of emotional stimuli (Pannu-Hayes et al 2009).
It is hypothesized that Veterans with PTSD will show
marked deficits in reaction time to emotional stimuli,
when general reaction time is controlled for. The study
consists of forty-nine VA enrolled OEF/OIF combat
Veterans deployed after September 11, 2001. Subjects
completed The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV
Diagnoses-I (SCID-I), a Reaction Time (RTI) test of simple
response speed, and the Affective Go-No Go (AGN) a task
in which words of positive, negative or neutral valence are
rapid presented and the subject must respond to the word
valence. Positron Emission Tomography and Magnetic
Resonance Imaging data were acquired for a future region
of interest analysis of the ACC. Results hope to show that
PSTD not only inhibits attention, but the ability to process
and respond to emotional stimuli as marked by a deficit in
overall ACC activity.

connectivity and network characterization using graph
theory metrics were performed. Using graph theory
metrics as characteristics of ASD and Control groups, we
further performed a classification analysis, based on ROC
curves. Results: Network changes between groups in the
interoceptive and exteroceptive states showed opposite
effects, revealing that inferences about connectivity in
ASD are state-dependent. ASD functional networks
largely vary across conditions: in the exogenous run, the
analysis of ASD brain network reveals sub-optimal
metrics, suggesting that it is badly suited for this kind of
task. As attention shifts to self, ASD brain networks
improve their metrics – even surpassing those of
Controls’- suggesting that ASD networks reaches its
optimum capabilities in those cognitive states related to
introspective tasks and body perception. While network
measures decode whether a patient belongs to the ASD or
normal group at a modest performance of 60%, comparing
how network parameters change with state achieves very
accurate decoding performance (90%).
Conclusions:
Connectivity analysis revealed consistent and organized
differences in functional connectivity between ASD and
control groups, suggesting that a distinct pattern of
dynamical connectivity may be related to the
physiopathology of ASD. ASD process interoceptive
information just as they process external information,
without adapting information processing to the fact that
the signal comes from their own body, possibly caused by
an altered capacity to self awareness. This results may
have important behavioural consequences : ASD
individuals may exaggeratedly focus on internal physical
sensations that tend to automatically elicit anxiety and
panic, leading to inappropriate emotional reactions.

★

I-31
FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN AUTISM
SPECTRUM
DISORDER
IN
DIFFERENT
ATTENTIONAL STATES P. Barttfeld, Laboratorio de
Neurociencia Integrativa, Buenos Aires; B. Wicker, AixMarseille University; S. Cukier, FLENI, Buenos Aires; S.
Navarta, Laboratorio de Neurociencia Integrativa, Buenos
Aires; J. Calvar, FLENI, Buenos Aires; R. Leiguarda, FLENI,
Buenos Aires; M. Sigman, Laboratorio de Neurociencia
Integrativa, Buenos Aires- Background: Interoception is our
sensitivity to stimuli originating inside of the body. As
humans, we perceive feelings from our bodies that relate
our state of well-being, our energy and stress levels, our
mood and disposition, all of which seem to be impaired in
ASD. Anatomical and functional brain studies have
converged to the hypothesis that ASD is associated with
atypical connectivity, producing a system that is
ineffective for integrating complex information at the
neural and cognitive level. For instance, task positive
(TPN) and task negative (TNN) functional brain networks
of ASD and normal subjects have qualitatively different
intrinsic organization, with abnormal connectivity in the
TNN but not in the TPN in ASD. It remains however
unexplored if the TPN differentiates whether the task
involves directing attention internally (interoception) or
externally. Objectives: We reasoned that brain network
organization during interoceptive states may show more
pronounced differences between groups and hence
constitute a precise physiological signature of ASD. To
examine this hypothesis we measured functional
connectivity in three different mental states varying the
focus of attention of the subjects. Methods: Participants
included 12 individuals with high-functioning autism or
Asperger’s Syndrome matched to a group of 12 typically
developing individuals. Whole brain fMRI data were
acquired with a GE HDx 3T scanner. Rest run : subjects lie
eyes closed in the scanner. Introspective run : subjects had
to count the number of their breathing cycles. Exogenous
Run : subjects had to detect and count beeps (target) with
a little higher pitch among others. Classic functional

	  

I-32
ENHANCED ELECTROCORTICAL RESPONSES TO
FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS
OF
EMOTION
IN
PSYCHOPATHY Pedro R. Almeida, University of Porto;
Fernando Ferreira-Santos, University of Porto, UCL Institute of
Child Health; Joana B. Vieira, University of Porto, Georgetown
University; Pedro Moreira, University of Porto; Fernando
Barbosa, University of Porto; João Marques-Teixeira,
University of Porto- Psychopathy has been related both to
impairments in processing of facial affect and amygdala
dysfunction. However, self-report findings have not
clearly established the relation between degree of
psychopathy and ability to process facial expressions of
emotion. In the present work we have characterized the
early event related responses (N170 and Early Frontal
Positivity- EFP) to pictures of facial emotion, according to
degree of psychopathy. Participants viewed angry,
disgusted, fearful and happy expressions matched in
arousal, plus low arousing neutral faces. We controlled for
the use of magno-/parvocellular-based processing by
manipulating the spatial frequency in which stimuli were
displayed. Participants with a higher degree of
psychopathy showed enhanced N170 and EFP responses.
Effects of emotional category were found on the N170 and
the EFP, but these effects were not dependent on the

81	  

degree of psychopathy. These findings question the
assumption of facial emotion processing impairments in
psychopathy. Given the well documented association
between psychopathy and abnormalities in amygdala
function, these results suggest the presence of a
modulation of cortical activity by facial expressions of
emotion, independently of amygdala functioning. We
consider the role of such mechanisms in the aetiology of
the psychopathic phenotype.

electrodes in the “decrease sub-group”. As far as the
metabolic results are concerned, in the “increase” subgroup on the one hand, there were correlations between
decreased cerebral glucose metabolism and increase of
emotional prosody recognition performances in the left
fusiform gyrus (BA 20) ; there were correlations between
increased cerebral glucose metabolism and increase of
emotional prosody recognition performances in the left
insula (BA 13), and the left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 47).
On the other hand, in the “decrease” sub-group, there
were correlations between decreased cerebral glucose
metabolism and impairment of emotional prosody
recognition in the right gyrus temporal superior (BA 22)
and the left cerebellum; there were correlations between
increased cerebral glucose metabolism and impairment of
emotional prosody recognition in the right inferior frontal
gyrus (BA 47), the right orbitofrontal cortex (BA 10) but
also in the right somatosensory cortex (BA 6). These
results confirm that the impaired recognition of emotions
after STN DBS is not specific to the visual modality but
may also be present when emotions are expressed through
the human voice, and STN DBS modulates a distributed
network known to subtend emotional prosody processing,
implying the involvement of STN in this network.
1. Péron et al., Neuropsychology, 2010. 24(1): p. 1-8.
2. Péron et al., Neuropsychologia, 2010. 48(4): p. 1053-62.
3. Péron et al.,
PLoS One, 2010. 5(3): p. e9919.
4. Le Jeune Péron et al., Brain, 2008. 131(Pt 6): p. 1599-608.
5. Péron, J., et al., Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology
and Biological Psychiatry, 2011. 35: p. 987–996.

I-33
EFFECTS
OF
SUBTHALAMIC
DEEP
BRAIN
STIMULATION
IN
THE
RECOGNITION
OF
EMOTIONAL PROSODY: A PET STUDY IN
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Julie Péron, University of
Rennes, University of Geneva; Florence Le Jeune, University of
Rennes, Centre Eugène Marquis; Florent Lalys, University of
Rennes; Pierre Jannin, University of Rennes; Sascha Frühholz,
University of Geneva; Jean-François Houvenhagel, University
of Rennes, Hôpital Pontchaillou, CHU de Rennes; Thibaut
Dondaine, University of Rennes, Hôpital Pontchaillou, CHU de
Rennes, CH Guillaume Régnier; Sophie Drapier, University of
Rennes, Hôpital Pontchaillou, CHU de Rennes; Paul Sauleau,
University of Rennes, Hôpital Pontchaillou, CHU de Rennes;
Claire Haegelen, University of Rennes, Hôpital Pontchaillou,
CHU de Rennes; Bruno Millet, University of Rennes, CH
Guillaume Régnier; Didier Grandjean, University of Geneva;
Marc Vérin, University of Geneva, Hôpital Pontchaillou, CHU
de Rennes- The recognition of emotions is impaired
following subthalamic nucleus (STN) deep brain
stimulation (DBS) in Parkinson’s disease (PD) [1-3]. These
changes have been linked to a disturbance in the STN’s
limbic territory, which is thought to be involved in
emotional processing. In the facial modality, this was
confirmed by PET studies where these emotional
modifications were correlated with changes in glucose
metabolism in different brain regions, including the
amygdala and the orbitofrontal regions [4]. Recently, it has
been shown, at the behavioural level, that these emotional
changes induced by STN DBS in PD were also present in
the vocal modality [2]. Nevertheless, the brain region
sustaining
these
emotional
prosody
recognition
modifications has yet to be identified. Accordingly, the
aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of
STN DBS on emotional prosody recognition of PD patients
and to correlate emotion modifications with changes in
glucose metabolism. To this end, we conducted 18FDGPET scans in 30 PD patients in pre- and post-STN DBS
conditions and correlated changes in their glucose
metabolism with modified performances on an original
emotional prosody paradigm [2, 5].
Two different
patterns of emotional performances were identified in
post-operative condition. A first sub-group of PD patients
(N=17) showed increase of their emotional judgement in
post-operative whereas the second sub-group (N=13)
decreased their performances in post-operative condition.
Regressions showed that the best predictors explaining
these two patterns of results was the depression score in
the “increase” sub-group, and the location of the contact

	  

I-34
EMOTION REGULATION STRATEGIES PREDICT
SYMPTOM FLUCTUATIONS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA
Beverly E. Pozuelos, Harvard University; Elizabeth Langer,
Boston University; Laura M. Tully, Harvard University;
Christine I. Hooker, Harvard University- Social functioning
impairments are well documented in schizophrenia, yet
the mechanisms by which they contribute to the
exacerbation and maintenance of symptoms remain
unknown. Research indicates that effective emotion
regulation strategies are mediated by lateral prefrontal
cortex (LPFC) function. While LPFC deficits are well
documented in schizophrenia, it is unclear how these
deficits might relate to self-reported emotion regulation
strategies and response to social conflict. The present
study examines the relationship between trait-related
emotion regulation strategies, daily social interactions,
mood and symptoms in a sample of individuals with
schizophrenia and matched healthy controls. We used
standard self-report questionnaires of emotion regulation
strategies including the Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale
(DAS) and Cognitive Emotion Regulation Questionnaire
(CERQ) and a novel daily dairy. In the daily diary,
participants reported on interpersonal conflict, mood and
symptoms each day for 21 days. Analysis thus far
indicates response to conflict relates to symptom level in
participants with schizophrenia: high conflict distress and
high DAS scores related to worse negative symptoms, and

82	  

high conflict distress with lower rumination scores relate
to increased auditory hallucinations after conflicts. Future
analysis will examine how 1) interpersonal stressful events
influence affect and symptoms the same day, and 2)
whether LPFC dependent neurocognitive skills predict the
influence of social conflict on symptoms. This study could
provide valuable insight into the nature of social
impairments in schizophrenia.

prefrontal (PFC) brain regions. Little is known about how
cognitive reappraisal processes are affected by the extent
of attentional resources available, and how dividing
attention may tax prefrontal regions also important for
cognitive reappraisal. We analyzed fMRI data from 34
adults (ages 18-35) on a cognitive reappraisal task utilizing
positive, negative, and neutral images from the
International Affective Picture System (IAPS) database. 16
adults completed the task with full-attention devoted to
task performance, and 18 completed the task with
divided-attention, using an auditory monitoring task to
divide attention.
When examining the viewing of
emotional images, regardless of regulation condition,
there was more recruitment of lateral PFC in the fullattention group and more recruitment of medial PFC in
the divided-attention group. When specifically comparing
regulation conditions to the view condition, there was an
interaction between image valence (positive or negative
image) and regulation instruction (increase or decrease
emotion) that was present in the full-attention and
divided-attention groups: hedonic regulation (i.e.,
increasing positive or decreasing negative emotion)
displayed greater amygdala and visual attention
activation than nonhedonic regulation. However, there
also was a three-way interaction of valence, instruction,
and condition (full or divided attention). This three-way
interaction displayed a greater difference between hedonic
and nonhedonic reappraisal in the full-attention group
than in the divided-attention group in regions of the
lateral PFC; preferential lateral PFC recruitment for
hedonic regulation occurred in the full attention condition
but not in the divided attention condition. Taken together,
these results provide evidence of a neural distinction
between hedonic and nonhedonic reappraisal, but suggest
that this differentiation may be stronger when full
attention can be devoted toward reappraisal than when
attention is divided by performance of a secondary task.
The results also suggest a more lateral-to-medial PFC shift
in processing of emotional images as attention is divided,
suggesting that lateral PFC recruitment may demand
resources that cannot be engaged when attention is
divided.

I-35
COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL OF EMOTION: A METAANALYSIS OF HUMAN NEUROIMAGING STUDIES
Jason Buhle, Columbia University; Jennifer A. Silvers,
Columbia University; Tor D. Wager, University of Colorado,
Boulder; Richard Lopez, Dartmouth University; Chukwudi
Onyemekwu, Columbia University; Jochen Weber, Columbia
University; Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia University- Recent
years have seen an explosion of neuroimaging studies on
the cognitive regulation of emotion. The bulk of these
studies have examined the neural bases of cognitive
reappraisal, a form of emotion regulation that involves
changing the way one thinks about an emotional stimulus
in order to change its affective impact. An important but
still unresolved question is whether reappraisal relies on
cognitive control regions, such as dorsomedial,
dorsolateral, and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (dmPFC,
dlPFC, and vlPFC), or emotion-specific control circuits,
such as ventromedial PFC (vmPFC), an area associated
with fear extinction and emotional learning. Previous
work has typically emphasized the amygdala as the
primary target of reappraisal, but it is unclear if different
reappraisal strategies, affective stimuli and regulatory
goals similarly modulate amygdala activity. We
performed a meta-analysis of 45 neuroimaging studies of
cognitive reappraisal in order to identify common activity
across paradigms that differed in terms of strategies
(reinterpret or distance), stimuli (positive or negative), and
goals (increase or decrease). The implementation of
reappraisal consistently activated cognitive control
regions (dmPFC, dlPFC, vlPFC), but not emotion-specific
control circuits (vmPFC). The amygdala was a primary
target of reappraisal across strategy types, but only when
decreasing negative emotion. Ventral striatum was a
primary target of reappraisal across strategies, stimuli and
goals. Taken together, these findings suggest that the
cognitive reappraisal of emotion relies upon dynamic
interactions between cortical and subcortical networks
involved in emotional processing and cognitive control.

I-37
COMMON NEURAL MECHANISM FOR EMOTION
REGULATION AND MOTOR INHIBITION Torre, J. B.,
University of California, Los Angeles; Inagaki, T. I., University
of California, Los Angeles; Mulvenna, C. M., University of
California, Los Angeles; Haltom, K. E. B., University of
California, Los Angeles; Stanton, A. L., University of
California, Los Angeles; Lieberman, M. D., University of
California, Los Angeles- Higher activation in right
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (RVLPFC) has been
consistently implicated in emotion regulation processes
such as reappraisal, altering the meaning of a stimulus to
make it more or less emotionally evocative, and in affect
labeling, an unintentional form of emotion regulation that
involves applying an affective label to an emotional
stimulus. Activation in this region is often found to

I-36
THE NEURAL EFFECTS OF DIVIDED ATTENTION
ON COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL John A. Morris, Boston
College; Elizabeth A. Kensinger, Boston College; Christina M.
Leclerc, State University of New York at Oswego - Cognitive
reappraisal is an effective emotion regulation strategy that
is used to alter one’s interpretation of a situation’s
meaning. Reappraisal is thought to rely on cognitive
control to provide flexible interpretation of a situation, a
process demonstrated to involve both medial and lateral

	  

83	  

correlate inversely to activation in the amygdala,
suggesting an inhibitory relationship between these
regions corroborated by a reduction in self-reported levels
of negative affect. Other domains of inhibition have
shown activation in this same region, most notably in
studies investigating motor inhibition in a ‘Go/No-Go’
motor task. Further, there is previous evidence of
‘inhibitory spillover’ where inhibiting a motor response to
stimuli has incidentally inhibited an emotional
response. This mounting evidence suggests RVLPFC may
play a central role in inhibitory self-control across
numerous domains, though to date no systematic research
has directly contrasted these multi-domain inhibition
tasks. A conjunction analysis between these three tasks
(Reappraisal, Affect Labeling, and motor Go/No-Go) in 90
subjects suggests the possibility of RVLPFC as a multidomain neural inhibitory mechanism.

Rebecca D. Calcott, University of Oregon; Lisa M. May,
University of Oregon; Jessica M. Tipsord, Lewis and Clark
College; Joshua C. Felver-Grant, University of Oregon; Elliot T.
Berkman, University of Oregon- Mindfulness meditation
practice has been shown to improve emotion regulation
abilities, which, in turn are linked to tangible
improvements
in
psychological
well-being.
A
fundamental component of mindfulness training involves
learning to maintain a non-judgmental attentional focus in
the present moment. The present pilot study examines the
neural mechanisms by which mindfulness practice
translates into improved emotion regulation, by looking at
mindfulness-related changes in neural activation during
an emotion regulation task. Sixteen adults (1 male) ages
29-52 completed an 8-week Mindfulness Based Stress
Reduction (MBSR) class. Participants took part in weekly
90-minute sessions that included a body scan, sitting
meditation practice, and yoga, and were also assigned to
practice at home. At baseline and after the final class,
participants completed separate experimental sessions in a
neuroimaging laboratory, in which they performed an
emotion regulation task while their brains were scanned
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In
the task, participants are instructed to either just look,
label, or reappraise neutral and aversive picture stimuli,
and rate how much distress they experienced while
viewing each item. We examined the change in
participants’ neural activity during the emotion regulation
task from the baseline to the endpoint scanning sessions.
Preliminary analyses suggest that activation in frontal
control regions during emotion regulation increased as a
function of the intervention. This study could lead to a
better understanding of the mechanisms by which
mindfulness meditation improves emotion regulation
abilities and leads to other positive health outcomes.

I-38
REAPPRAISAL OF PERSONAL MEMORIES VIA
'NEUTRALIZING'
AND
'POSITIVIZING':
IMMEDIATE AND LONG-TERM EFFECTS Dore, B.,
Columbia University; Ochsner, K. N., Columbia UniversitySeparate literatures emphasize the importance of coping
with negative personal experiences by decreasing negative
affect (e.g., via 'self-distancing') or by increasing positive
affect (e.g., via 'benefit-finding'). In a behavioural study
directly comparing the effects of these two reappraisal
strategies, participants (n=96) recalled memories of
personal events and then appraised the meaning of these
events by focusing on their positive aspects and
consequences ('positivize' group), by focusing on their
neutral aspects and consequences ('neutralize' group), or
by reflecting on the events and their consequences
regardless of valence ('reflect' control group). Participants
made ratings of positive affect, negative affect, and
memory vividness immediately after applying these
reappraisal strategies and again in an online follow-up
completed at least 1 week after the initial lab session.
Confirming our hypotheses, both the 'positivize' and the
'neutralize' strategies led to changes in the immediate
affective impact and subjective vividness of personal
memories. Results from the 1 week follow-up suggest
that, for negative memories, the ‘positivize’ strategy leads
to a lasting increase in positive affect and the ‘neutralize’
strategy leads to a lasting decrease in negative affect.
Additionally, both immediate and long-term effects of the
’positivize' strategy on positive affect ratings were
correlated with individual differences in 'promotion
focus', as assessed by the Regulatory Focus Questionnaire.
These findings shed light on the immediate and long-term
impact of these two reappraisal strategies for memories of
life experiences and suggest a connection to chronic selfregulatory orientation.

I-40
SHORT-TERM
MEDITATION
INDUCES
THE
FRONTAL CEREBRAL BLOOD FLOW ASYMMETRY
Yi-Yuan Tang, Texas Tech University, University of OregonAsymmetry in frontal electrical activity has been reported
to be associated with positive emotion. One form of
meditation based-intervention, integrative body-mind
training (IBMT) improves positive emotion and
neuroplasticity. The purpose of this study is to determine
whether short-term IBMT induces frontal asymmetry.
Brain imaging results showed that five-day (30-min per
day) IBMT significantly enhanced cerebral blood flow
(CBF) in subgenual/adjacent ventral anterior cingulate
cortex, medial prefrontal cortex and insula, and also
increased left frontal asymmetry. Our results suggest 2.5 h
IBMT changes left frontal CBF at resting state, which may
underlie the promotion of positive emotion.

★

I-41
THE JOYFUL AMYGDALA: THE MOTIVATIONAL
SALIENCE OF POSITIVE STIMULI IN TRAIT
HAPPINESS William A. Cunningham, The Ohio State

I-39
INCREASES IN FRONTAL CONTROL REGION
ACTIVATION DURING EMOTION REGULATION
FOLLOWING A MINDFULNESS INTERVENTION

	  

84	  

University; Tabitha Kirkland, The Ohio State UniversityResearch in positive neuroscience seeks to understand the
neural bases of positive experience. Happiness is not
simply the absence of sadness, but rather reflects a
positive worldview and a set of motivated processes to
foster and maintain positive experience. Indeed, happy
people are thought to live their lives wearing “rose
colored glasses,” perceptually attending to opportunities
and experiences that others may simply miss. To the
extent that trait-happy people have an automatic tuning
toward positive opportunities, we predict that participants
high in trait happiness may not only show reduced
amygdala activation to negative stimuli (as they are less
sensitive to negativity), but, more critically, will also show
the greatest amygdala response to positive stimuli,
reflecting a tuning towards positivity. In early work, the
amygdala has been understood as a threat detector and
amygdala sensitivity has been shown to be associated
with individual differences in constructs associated with
threat, such as neuroticism and anxiety disorders. Yet, the
narrow understanding of the amygdala’s affective
function as simply reflecting threat/fear has been
expanded, and we have recently proposed the
motivational salience hypothesis, which states that the
amygdala is sensitive to motivational relevance.
According to this view, a primary function of the
amygdala is to signal what is important in any particular
situation, and then modulate appropriate perceptual,
attentional,
autonomic,
and
cognitive/conceptual
processes to deal with the challenges or opportunities that
are present. To the extent that this is true, the “rose
colored glasses” of happy people should result in an
increased attention to positive stimuli and an enhanced
amygdala response to these stimuli. 50 participants
viewed 10-second blocks of positive, negative, and neutral
IAPS stimuli during fMRI scanning. Following scanning,
participants completed the Subjective Happiness Scale
along with several control measures. As expected,
participants high in trait happiness showed the greatest
amygdala response to positive blocks. These data
demonstrate that the amygdala is not simply the origin of
negative feeling, but may also help contribute to positive
experience and subjective well-being.

theory states that an outcome of a more effortful action
would be preferred due to a greater contrast between the
aversive action and the rewarding nature of the outcome;
this theory predicts increased VS activity for rewards
acquired with more effort. To test these alternative
hypotheses, we used functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) as participants engaged in feedback-based
learning that required low (LE) and high cognitive effort
(HE) to obtain positive feedback while the objective
amount of information provided by feedback remained
constant. No significant difference in accuracy was
observed between the effort conditions but all participants
indicated that the HE condition was more difficult.
Increased VS activation was associated with feedback
presented during the HE condition relative to the LE
condition, when controlling for activation from
corresponding control conditions for which feedback was
random, rather than based on performance. These results
suggest that increased cognitive effort produces
corresponding increases in VS activity, in line with the
predictions made by contrast theory.
I-43
ROLE OF ENDOGENOUS OPIOIDS FOR HEDONIC
CAPACITY TOWARDS SOCIAL AND NON-SOCIAL
REWARDS Siri Leknes, University of Oxford, University of
Oslo; Chantal Berna, University of Oxford; Irene Tracey,
University of Oxford- The enjoyment of everyday rewards
such as eating a tasty meal or seeing other people’s
smiling faces, is central to mental health. Anhedonia, the
inability to experience pleasure from social and non-social
rewards, likely reflects dysfunction of the brain’s reward
system. Anhedonia is a key symptom of psychiatric
disorders such as depression, schizophrenia and drug
addiction. Recent neurobiological theories on reward
system function parse reward into hedonics and
motivation, thought to be based on preconscious ‘liking’
and ‘wanting’. A dissociation between ‘liking’ and
‘wanting’ has been found on the level of neurotransmitter
systems, with opioids mediating hedonic ‘liking’ and
dopamine underpinning motivational ‘wanting’. The
endogenous opioid system has been shown to mediate
‘liking’ of both social and non-social rewards in rodents
and primates. However, less is known about the role of
endogenous opioids in human reward processing.
According to the brain opioid theory of social attachment,
opioids may play a greater role for social rewards in
primates than in other mammals (Machin and Dunbar, in
press, Behaviour). Interestingly, opposite effects of opioids
have been reported for motivation of social and non-social
rewards. Whilst systemic opioid antagonist treatment
decreases ‘wanting’ of non-social rewards such as food, in
primates opioid antagonism has been shown to increase
wanting of social rewards. Here, we used an opioid
antagonist, naloxone, to investigate the role of
endogenous opioids for social and non-social hedonic
capacity in humans. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study, we tested hedonic function in twenty
healthy volunteers (11 females) using a state visual

I-42
SUBJECTIVE COGNITIVE EFFORT MODULATES
ACTIVITY OF THE VENTRAL STRIATUM Ekaterina
Dobryakova, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey Newark; Elizabeth Tricomi, Rutgers, The State University of
New Jersey - Newark- Goal-directed behavior is driven by
reward desirability and by amount of effort required to
obtain the goal. Previous neuroimaging work points to a
role of the ventral striatum (VS) in coding for reward
value, but it is unclear how cognitive effort required to
achieve a goal may influence subjective reward value and
activity in the VS. Effort-discounting theory states that
humans prefer low effort actions that result in high
reward; this theory predicts decreased VS activity for
rewards acquired with more effort. However, contrast

	  

85	  

analogue scale version of a validated anhedonia
questionnaire, the Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale
(SHAPS). After treatment with high-dose intravenous
naloxone (bolus 0.15 mg/kg followed by infusion 0.2
mg/kg) or placebo, participants rated how much they
would enjoy a series of everyday primary rewards (e.g. a
cup of tea, a warm bath) or social rewards (e.g. other
people’s smiling faces). We hypothesised that naloxone
treatment would disrupt the normal function of the
reward system in humans and cause reduced hedonic
capacity. Our results confirm this hypothesis. Although
we found no significant effects of naloxone on mood,
blockade of endogenous opioid neurotransmission
significantly reduced ratings of hedonic capacity (paired ttest, p=0.006). This reduction was significant for both
primary, non-social rewards (p=0.02) and for items
relating specifically to social rewards (p=0.004). These
findings support the idea that human hedonic capacity
may be based on preconscious ‘liking’, which in rats is
mediated via opioid-rich ‘hedonic hotpots’ in the ventral
pallidum and nucleus accumbens. Our results also suggest
that disruptions in endogenous opioid signalling may
underpin anhedonia associated with mental illness. The
role of endogenous opioids for social and non-social
rewards ‘wanting’ in humans is investigated in a
subsequent, ongoing study.

Test-retest reliabilities during gain anticipation in the
NAcc and loss anticipation in the anterior insula
demonstrated significant test-retest reliability (ICC ~ 0.6)
for the highest levels of gain and loss ($5.00). Validity
analyses examined whether these incentive processing
neural signals index general affective factors. Principal
components analyses identified two affective factors “Positive Arousal” and “Negative Arousal” - from
individual difference measures. NAcc activation was
associated with Positive Arousal but not Negative Arousal
(r = 0.24), whereas anterior insula activation was
associated with Negative Arousal but not Positive Arousal
(r = 0.28). These findings suggest that incentive paradigms
that employ a range of incentives may better establish testretest reliability of elicited neural activity, that this
incentive-elicited neural activity correlates with emotional
traits, and that FMRI can be used to index individual
differences in incentive processing with potential
relevance to decision making.
I-45
THE NEURAL BASIS OF GRATITUDE Qiang Cai,
Peking University; Hongbo Yu, Peking University; Xiaolin
Zhou, Peking University- Gratitude is defined as “a positive
emotional reaction to the receipt of a benefit that is
perceived to have resulted from the good intentions of
another” (Tsang, 2006). On the one hand, gratitude is
arose from “the admiration of a praiseworthy action
(intention) and the joy experienced when that action is
desirable (or valuable) to the self” (Ortony et al., 1988) and
thus it may function as a social reward; on the other hand,
gratitude may function as a buffer against stressful
circumstance, mitigating the unpleasant feeling therein
(Lyubomirsky et al., 2005). One possible consequence of
gratitude is prosocial behavior toward one’s benefactor
(Tsang, 2006). This study investigated the neural basis of
gratitude in social exchange through fMRI. We presented
participants with either mild or moderate painful stimulus
in each trial. The intensity of the pain stimulus was
ostensibly dependent upon whether one of three
anonymous confederates shared the pain with the
participants. In half of the trials, participants were
informed that the Share/NoShare decision was
voluntarily made by a partner, while in the other half they
were informed that the decision was made by the
computer. Following the pain delivery, participants were
asked to distribute an amount of money between
themselves and their partner for the current trial, with the
knowledge that the partner was not informed of this
procedure. This served as a measure of the participants’
prosocial behavior. Behaviorally, participants allocated
significantly more to the partner when the latter
voluntarily shared pain than when the decision was made
by the computer. When the decision was not to share, not
only the amount of money allocated to the partner was
significantly reduced, the difference between the two
decision makers was also absent. For the neuroimaging
data, we focused on the neural processes related to the
decision outcome (i.e., Share/NoShare). We found that the

I-44
NEURAL MARKERS OF INCENTIVE ANTICIPATION
ARE ASSOCIATED WITH AFFECTIVE TRAITS
Charlene C. Wu, Stanford University; Gregory R. SamanezLarkin, Stanford University, Vanderbilt University; Brian
Knutson, Stanford University- Early studies using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) to examine incentive
processing in humans identified increased blood
oxygenated level-dependent activation in the nucleus
accumbens (NAcc) during gain anticipation and the
anterior insula during loss anticipation (Knutson et al.,
2001). These incentive processing neural responses have
recently been linked to individual differences in
impulsivity and psychopathy (Buckholtz et al., 2010).
However, the test- retest reliability of incentive processing
activation has been questioned (Fliessbach et al., 2010),
implicitly raising concerns about the robustness of links to
individual differences. Furthermore, investigations of
psychometric validity, or how these neural signals are
related to established measures of individual differences,
have been limited. All participants (n = 53) completed one
FMRI session of a monetary incentive delay (MID) task
and measures assessing individual differences in emotion
and motivation (NEO-SF, AVI, BIS/BAS). Two years later,
a subset of these participants (n = 14) completed a second
FMRI session of the MID task. During the MID task,
participants anticipated and experienced the outcomes of
six cue types signaling varying amounts of potential
monetary gains and losses (±0.00, ±$0.50, ±$5.00). To
examine test-retest reliability of activation, peak
individual responses were extracted from both NAcc and
anterior insula volumes of interest across the two sessions.

	  

86	  

activation in the bilateral caudate was higher when the
partner voluntarily decided to share than when the
decision was forced. When the decision was not to share,
the difference between the two decision makers was
absent, indicating that this activation reflects the positive
emotion elicited by the intentional helping bestowed by
the partner. Moreover, this differential effect in the
bilateral caudate correlated with participants’ trait
gratitude as measured by a questionnaire. Furthermore,
the intention-modulated differential effect of BOLD signal
extracted from an a priori region of interest within the left
caudate (Izuma et al., 2008) predicted the difference in
monetary allocation. In contrast, the left insula showed a
reversed pattern of interaction, such that less activation
was observed when the “share” decision was made by a
partner than by the computer. To conclude, we
demonstrate that gratitude is encoded in the brain reward
circuitry and can reduce the neural responses to
unpleasant events in brain structures responsible for
processing pain and negative emotions. The neural
activity in the reward circuitry may drive the prosocial
behavior of the help receivers.

Tufts University; Erich Tusch, Tufts University; Gina R.
Kuperberg, Tufts University; Massachusetts General HospitalPeople tend have positive associations with their own selfconcept: for example, we tend to expect more good things
to happen to ourselves than to others and to think that we
have more positive traits than others. Most previous work
has examined this self-positivity bias using questionnaire
methods. It is less clear whether it influences online
processing of incoming stimuli. Event-related potentials
(ERPs), a direct neural measure with excellent temporal
resolution, are an ideal technique to investigate this
question. We recorded ERPs while subjects read twosentence social vignettes in 2nd person (self condition) or
3rd person (other condition) with a positive, negative, or
neutral critical word in the second sentence (e.g., ‘A man
knocks on Sandra’s/your hotel room door. She/you see(s)
that he has a gift/tray/gun in his hand.’). ERPs timelocked to the critical word showed an interaction between
self-relevance and emotional valence due to a reduced
negativity within the N400 time-window to positive
critical words in self-relevant contexts. This suggests that
the self-positivity bias is available online and influences
the processing of words at the earliest stages of computing
their meaning.

I-46
REMINDER OF DEATH DECREASES ANTERIOR
CINGULATE RESPONSES TO THE SUFFERING OF
OTHERS Siyang Luo, Zhenhao Shi, Xiangyu Zuo, Shihui
Han - Death-related thoughts influence human behaviors
tremendously. However, whether and how reminder of
death modulates brain activity underlying human
behaviors remains unknown. The current study tested the
hypothesis that mortality salience inductions influence the
neural activity involved in empathy - a capacity that
mediates prosocial behaviors. Using functional MRI we
scanned two groups of healthy adults during perception
of others in pain before and after priming procedures that
induced mortality salience or negative affect. We found
that perceived pain in others activated the anterior
cingulate/supplementary motor cortex (ACC/SMA),
bilateral anterior insula/frontal cortex, bilateral secondary
somatosensory cortex, and left middle temporal gyrus.
However,
mortality
salience
priming
decreased
ACC/SMA activity to perceived pain whereas negative
affect priming did not influence empathic neural
responses. Moreover, subjective ratings of fear of death
induced by the mortality salience priming mediated the
modulation of ACC/SMA activity and moderated the covariation of ACC and left insular activity in the pre- and
post-priming sessions. Our findings indicate that reminder
of death decreases human empathic neural responses to
perceived pain and this effect is mediated by the fear of
death induced by mortality salience.

I-48
STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY
OF
VENTRAL
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX AND NUCLEUS
ACCUMBENS PREDICTS TRAIT SELF-ESTEEM.
Robert S. Chavez, Dartmouth College; Katherine E. Powers,
Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton, Dartmouth CollegeThough different areas of the prefrontal cortex have been
implicated in various components of self-referential
processing, the ventral anterior cingulate cortex (vACC)
has been found to be most involved in the affective
component of evaluation in self-related stimuli. Selfesteem is an evaluative attitude based on the extent to
which a person views themself as favorable and leads
them respond to their social world. By definition,
individuals with high self-esteem tend to think of
themselves with elevated regard, but little work has been
to investigate the underlying neural networks that give
rise to these attitudes. In the current study, we used
diffusion tensor imaging and probabilistic tractography to
investigate whether individual differences in the
structural connectivity of vACC and nucleus accumbens
(NAcc; a putative reward area) would be related to a traitlevel measure of self-esteem. Because of the evaluative
nature of self-esteem, we hypothesized self-esteem would
be related to greater connectivity of NAcc to vACC, but
not other regions involved in self-relevant processing or
reward (e.g., MPFC, OFC). In a sample of 75 normal
subjects, we found a positive relationship between leftNAcc /vACC connectivity and self-esteem. As
hypothesized, there were no significant results for any
other brain areas. These results provide evidence that the
structural connectivity of brain regions involved in
processing the affective component of self-relevant

★

I-47
ERPS REVEAL RAPID EFFECTS OF THE SELFPOSITIVITY BIAS DURING THE PROCESSING OF
SOCIAL VIGNETTES Eric C. Fields, Tufts University;
Camila Carneiro de Lima, Tufts University; Rohan Natraj,

	  

87	  

cognition to reward-related areas contributes to individual
differences in trait self-esteem.

behaviors. These results suggest that a disgust response
toward a social other could be acquired by way of
association, and could affect the way we judge that
person’s behavior. Previous studies have identified a
disgust-like response toward stigmatized groups such as
drug addicts and homeless people. Our findings might
point to a mechanism by which such responses are
acquired, but they also propose an opportunity to
extinguish conditioned disgust and overturn its bias on
social decision making.

★

I-49
HOW DISGUST AFFECTS SOCIAL DECISIONS May
Yuan, William A. Shine Great Neck South High School;
Marianne Reddan, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine; Daniela
Schiller, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine- Recent studies suggest
that the basic emotion of disgust is involved in more
complex human behaviors, such as judgment of morality.
Participants primed with disgust, for example, are prone
to make harsher moral judgments. People could also be
disgusted of neutral cues when these are associated with
disgusting stimuli such as bad odors. In this study, we
asked whether such “conditioned disgust” could occur for
a social other could affect the way we judge this
character’s behavior.
To examine this question we
designed a two-stage paradigm. In the first stage, subjects
underwent disgust conditioning using a picture-picture
paradigm. One of two fictional characters was paired with
disgust-inducing images (CS+), while the other was paired
with neutral images (CS-). To assess subjects’ disgust
conditioning we measured skin conductance response
(SCR), and electromyography (EMG) activation of the
levator labii (a facial muscle activated when one is
disgusted). We also asked subjects to give an expectancy
rating at the beginning of each trial, to determine how
negative they expected the image following the character
would be. In addition, we asked them to subjectively rate
how disgusting they thought the characters were before
and after conditioning. In the second stage we examined
how our participants would judge the behavior of the
character now eliciting a conditioned disgust response
(induced in phase I). Subjects were presented with 32
scenarios, each describing either a positive or a negative
behavior of one of the two characters from Phase I. For
each scenario they judged the moral appropriateness of
the behavior, made an attribution as to what caused the
behavior (situational or dispositional factors), and rated
how much they liked the character. Verifying that disgust
conditioning was successful, the results show significantly
higher post versus pre conditioning disgust ratings for the
CS+, but not for the CS-. This increase in CS+ disgust
evaluation was correlated with the difference in
expectancy ratings between the CS+ and CS- during the
late phase of conditioning, and the expectancy ratings
were correlated with EMG levator labii activation. As for
the effect of learned disgust on social decision making, we
found that disgust conditioning decreased the character’s
likeability and moral scores, which was more pronounced
in our female participants as compared to the males.
Lastly, when we averaged together all scenarios, we found
a positive correlation between moral appropriateness and
liking. Positive behaviors that were considered
dispositional rather than situational tended to have higher
morality and liking scores, while negative behaviors that
were considered dispositional tended to have lower
morality and liking scores than situational negative

	  

I-50
THE SELF, THE OTHER AND THE DISGUST:
PROBING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISGUST
AND
SELF
IDENTITY
WITH
IMPLICIT
ASSOCIATIONS
Uri Berger, Gonda Multidisciplinary
Brain Research Center; David Anaki, Gonda Multidisciplinary
Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University- Disgust is an
intriguing emotion which plays a prominent role in many
psychopathologies and inter-group discrimination. In
addition, the neural basis of disgust has been studied
extensively indicating that several brain mechanisms (e.g.,
anterior insula) are involved in disgust processing.
However, the origins of disgust remain largely unknown.
Specifically, it remains unclear how simple mechanisms of
distaste, taste aversion and taste neophobia (all found in
nature), were structured into the human subjective
emotion. Important information regarding this change
may be acquired by examining uniquely human
mechanisms and their interaction with disgust. One such
unique human quality is the ability to differentiate
between the ‘self’ and the ‘other’. Humans are almost the
only living organisms with ability to self recognize, and
which makes a full use of this ability. This self/other
differentiation ability may be one of the human qualities
which make subjective disgust a rich emotional
experience. One outcome of such a relation is a disgust
bias towered self or others. This bias has been studied in
the past with results indicating a tendency to view the self
as less disgusting in comparison to others. For example, it
has been shown that subjects prefer their own body odor
compared to odor of others. Similarly, mothers prefer the
smell of their own child dirty diaper compared to that of a
stranger’s child. However, such studies greatest
advantage, namely, their natural setting, is also their
shortcoming. That is, these studies designs cannot be
modified to allow a full retesting with neuroimaging
measures, thus preventing a better examination of disgust.
The purpose of our presented study is to develop a new
methodology using an implicit task. In Exp. 1 16 subjects
have participated in an implicit association task (IAT),
containing four types of images; disgusting images,
pleasant images, family member pictures, and an
unknown and different race person pictures. Four
linguistic parallel labels were presented as responses; self
(family members), other (strangers), disgusting and
pleasant. The task examined the amount of incongruence
between labels, evident in reaction latencies. Results
indicated a large congruency effect; subjects preferred

88	  

pairing disgust with the ‘other’ and pleasant with the
‘self’. In Exp. 2 we estimated the emotional intensities
associated with the incongruent pairings of self-disgust
and other-pleasant. Sixteen subjects viewed superimposed
images comprised of two images from four categories
(self/disgust, self/pleasant, other/disgust, other/pleasant)
and responded on separate trials to either the image's
social (self/other) or valence (disgust/pleasant) features.
For example, a participant viewed an image of her mother
superimposed over a unflushed toilet and was requested
to reply either who is presented (self/other) or what is
presented (disgusting/pleasant). Our results indicate that
participants found it easier to attribute pleasantness to the
other than disgust to the self. These results underscore the
magnitude of emotional aversiveness that occurs when the
self is contaminated with a disgust provoking stimuli. The
current study has both practical and theoretical
implications which may constitute a new vantage point of
the neural basis of disgust.

response while arousal is related to EDA, when estimated
by independent judgments of pleasant and unpleasant
feelings, valence alone predicts EMG and EDA to the same
degree as separate valence and arousal judgments. These
results we suggest valence and arousal are one in the
same, or more specifically, arousal and valence are
different computations of the same bits of information.
The model we proposed claims that every emotional
phenomenon that can be explained by judgments of
arousal, may be explained by independent judgments of
pleasant and unpleasant feelings.
I-52
ROLE OF SUBGENUAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE
CORTEX IN SHIFTING AFFECTIVE STATE AND
VAGAL TONE
Lane, R.D., University of Arizona;
Weidenbacher, H., University of Arizona; Fort, C., University
of Arizona; Thayer, J.F., Ohio State University; Allen, J.J.B.We tested the hypothesis that subgenual anterior cingulate
cortex (sgACC) participates in concurrently regulating
shifts in both affective state and vagal tone. Eleven healthy
adults (6 women, mean age 23.1 years) performed the
Emotional Counting Stroop (counting the number of
words on the screen) in alternating 15-second blocks of
emotion words and neutral words. We measured the
absolute value of change between adjacent 15-second
blocks in both high frequency heart rate variability (vagal
tone) and the absolute value of change in BOLD signal in
specific regions of interest using a 3.0 T GE scanner.
Strong positive correlations were observed between
changes in vagal tone and changes in BOLD signal in
sgACC (BA25) (right: r=.67, p<.02; left r = .69, p <.02) and
left BA47 (r=.68, p<.02), key structures in the medial
visceromotor network. Correlations with change in vagal
tone were not significant in dorsal or rostral ACC or
dorsolateral PFC. These data suggest that as exteroceptive
stimuli are evaluated for emotional significance by a
network of structures including BA25, a change in
affective state occurs that is automatically supported by a
concomitant change in autonomic tone. These findings
may have implications for the unvarying mood and vagal
dysfunction associated with depression.

I-51
AROUSAL AND VALENCE ARE DIFFERENT
COMPUTATIONS OF THE SAME UNDERLYING
INFORMATION.
Assaf Kron; Daniel H. Lee; Ariel
Goldstein; Violetta Krichevski; Busisiwe Ncube; Cherry Chan;
Greta Cosgrove; Samandeep Brar; Aaaron Prosser; Adam K.
Anderson- Emotional experience is often mapped onto two
separate, independent axes of valence (i.e., pleasant vs.
unpleasant) and arousal (i.e., activated vs. calm). This
arousal-valence model (AVM) of emotion has become the
default assumption for the structure of emotional
experience in psychology and neuroscience. In the present
work we show that the assumptions of the AVM have
been over extended—that valence and arousal are not
separate components but different computations of the
same underlying information. Empirical support for the
AVM of emotion comes from a double dissociation that
involves skeletomotor response as indexed by corrugators’
Electromyography (EMG) response and sympathetic
autonomic response as indexed by electrodermal activity
(EDA). Corrugator EMG activity was found to be highly
correlated with valence judgments but not with arousal
judgments. EDA response to emotional stimuli were
found to be correlated with judgments of arousal but not
with valence (Lang et al., 1993). In this work we suggest
that this dissociation is an artifact of the AVM using
bipolar rather than independent valence scales. In two
experiments participants viewed emotional pictures while
EMG and EDA were measured. In addition participants
were rated their feelings according to the AVM and
independent pleasant and unpleasant feelings. The two
experiments are similar to each other except that different
versions of the independent pleasant and unpleasant
feelings were used. The results of two experiments
demonstrate that (a) bipolar valence and arousal ratings
do not reflect different sources of information, rather both
can be computed from independent unipolar judgments of
pleasant and unpleasant feelings; (b) contrary to previous
conclusions that valence is related to corrugator’s EMG

	  

I-53
ADDITIONAL
EVIDENCE
TOWARD
THE
CATEGORICAL PERCEPTION OF EMOTIONS IN
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AND ITS DYNAMICS
Fernando Barbosa, University of Porto; Joana B. Vieira,
University of Porto, Georgetown University; Pedro R. Almeida,
University of Porto; Fernando Ferreira-Santos, University of
Porto; João Marques-Teixeira, University of Porto- In this
study we investigated the nonlinear properties of the
emotional processing of facial expressions, aiming to
obtain additional evidences regarding the continuous Vs.
categorical models of emotional processing, and also the
bimodal perception of the same facial expressions,
depending on the subject’s previous experience. Selecting
pictures of six models/actors from the NimStim Face
Stimulus Set (Totenham et al., 2009) we created six

89	  

morphed continua between opposite prototypical
expressions (happiness and sadness) and manipulated the
order of presentation of the stimuli in each continuum
(randomized, from happiness to sadness, and vice-versa).
Thirty healthy participants, 15 male and 15 female,
performed a forced-choice task, where they were
instructed to identify each facial expression as “happy” or
“sad”. The response curves of each condition were
derived from the participants’ accumulated responses in
each picture frame, either for happiness or sadness. The
results yielded an effect of the order of presentation on the
point of change from one emotion to the opposite, with a
sudden shift between emotions (represented by a sigmoid
curve), which supports the thesis of categorical processing
of emotional information. Moreover, we have verified the
phenomenon of bimodality in the identification of facial
expressions that are in the vicinity of the turning point
between emotional categories. These findings support the
presence of nonlinear properties in the processing of
emotional information from facial expressions.

medication condition counterbalanced. On day 4 of each
phase, participants completed facial emotion recognition
testing without cocaine administration; on day 5 of each
phase they completed the facial emotion recognition test
after smoking 5 doses of cocaine within 60 minutes. Facial
emotion recognition was measured with a variant of the
computerized Facial Emotion Recognition (FER) task
previously shown to be sensitive to serotonergic drugs.
The FER measures accuracy of identifying fearful, angry,
sad, and happy faces morphed in 10% gradients from a
neutral expression to the full emotion. There was a main
effect of LCE on recognition of fear faces (p = 0.05), with
accuracy decreased on LCE relative to placebo. There was
no effect of LCE on recognition of sad, happy, or angry
faces, or on reaction times. No main effects of cocaine or
interactions between cocaine and LCE were observed.
These data indicate that increasing DA neurotransmission
by administration of LCE, the direct precursor of DA,
decreases accuracy of fear recognition in regular cocaine
users. This is broadly consistent with a decrease in
bilateral amygdalar response to emotional faces
previously reported in both healthy participants and nondepressed PD patients after levodopa. Converging
evidence indicates that DA neurotransmission modulates
facial emotion recognition. However, these effects appear
to be complex, with effects potentially relating to the
mechanism and extent of the alteration to DA signaling,
and both decreases and increases in DA transmission
disrupting optimal function. This research was supported
by NIDA grant 09236.

I-54
FACIAL EMOTION RECOGNITION AFTER SMOKED
COCAINE
AND
LEVODOPA-CARBIDOPAENTACAPONE ADMINISTRATION IN REGULAR
COCAINE SMOKERS Gillinder Bedi, NYSPI, Columbia
University; Nehal P. Vadhan, NYSPI, Columbia University;
Edward V. Nunes, NYSPI, Columbia University; Richard W.
Foltin, NYSPI, Columbia University; Adam Bisaga, NYSPI,
Columbia University- Facial emotion recognition is altered
by
drugs
that
affect
serotonergic
(5-HT)
neurotransmission.
For
instance,
3,4methylenedioxmethamphetamine
(MDMA;
‘ecstasy’,
which acts primarily on the 5-HT system) acutely reduces
fear identification in healthy humans; whereas selective 5HT reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants either
increase or decrease fear identification, depending on
whether dosing is acute or chronic. In contrast to the
literature on 5-HT, relatively little is known about the role
of dopaminergic (DA) signaling in perception of facial
emotion. However, patients with schizophrenia and those
with Parkinson’s Disease (PD), disorders characterized by
increased and decreased DA function respectively, have
impairments in social function and specifically in facial
affect processing, suggesting a role for DA in facial
emotional recognition. The purpose of this study (part of a
broader program investigating the therapeutic potential of
DA enhancement for cocaine abuse) was to study the
individual and combined effects of two dopaminergic
agents, Levodopa-Carbidopa-Entacapone (LCE) and
smoked cocaine, on recognition of facial emotion in
cocaine users, under controlled laboratory conditions.
Eleven healthy non-treatment-seeking cocaine smokers (10
male; 1 female) who reported smoking cocaine on average
3.3 (SD = 2.8) days per week and spending $176.40 (SD =
$151) on cocaine weekly completed this 10-day inpatient
within-subjects study. Participants underwent two 5-day
phases in which they were maintained on LCE
(400mg/100mg/200mg) or placebo, with the order of

	  

I-55
COMPETITION OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AND
VISUAL SCENES – FEARFUL FACES BROADEN
ATTENTION TO POTENTIAL THREAT Matthias J.
Wieser, University of Würzburg; Andreas Keil, University of
Florida- Facial expressions are of utmost importance for
social interaction as they convey important information
about others’ social intentions and emotions. In the
laboratory, perception of facial expressions is typically
investigated by presenting isolated face stimuli. In
everyday life, however, faces are rarely seen without
surrounding visual context, which most likely influences
perception and interpretation of the facial expression.
Indeed, recent research suggests that threatening visual
context enhances processing of fearful faces, but might
also enhance encoding of faces per se. Moreover, fearful
faces seem to lead attention to peripheral cues in order to
effectively detect potential threat in the environment.
From a competition point of view, faces and surrounding
visual contexts also compete for attentional resources.
Thus, enhanced attention to faces may come at cost of
perception of visual context. In the present study, we used
steady-state
visual
evoked
potentials
(ssVEP)
methodology together with frequency tagging (i.e.
simultaneously flickering multiple stimuli at multiple
frequencies) to examine competition between facial
expressions (fearful, neutral, happy) and affective visual
context (pleasant, neutral, unpleasant). By assigning two

90	  

different frequencies (12 vs. 15 Hz) to the face and the
visual context scene, it is possible to separate cortical
activity to competing stimuli and thus disentangle
attentional engagement to the face versus the context
stimuli. 20 participants watched flickering faces overlaid
on visual scenes, while high-density EEG was recorded
from 128 sensors. Participants were instructed to attend to
the faces, only. In a second run, participants were
instructed to rate the valence and arousal of the faces
presented in the different visual contexts. SSVEP analysis
revealed that happy facial expressions received most
attentional resources regardless of the background, and
arousing background scenes were generally associated
with larger ssVEP amplitudes. However, when fearful
facial expressions were shown, unpleasant visual context
scenes elicited larger mean ssVEP amplitudes compared to
other backgrounds. The face-sensitive N170 amplitude
was largest for fearful faces, without any influence of
visual context. Independent effects of facial expressions
and visual context scenes were found for affective ratings
of faces embedded in visual context. Together, these
findings suggest that the visual context does not matter
when happy faces are attended. In contrast, fearful faces
seem to elicit vigilance for potential threat cues and thus
enhance processing of unpleasant context. These findings
further illustrate the signal character of facial expressions
of fear, which leads to enhanced vigilance for potential
sources of threat in the environment.

we derived a measure of global explained variance (GEV)
and time duration for each microstate by fitting each
subject to the template map according to each condition.
Results of the GEV measure revealed three microstates
that better fit segments of the subject data during the
processing of reward omission while time frame analysis
showed four states had a longer duration as compared to
the reward reception condition. The GEV analysis also
revealed one microstate which significantly better fit data
in the reward reception condition while time frame
analysis indicated two different microstates with
significant longer durations in reward reception as
compared to reward omission. Since it has been argued
that reward omission leads to frustration, several of the
microstates which uniquely fit the reward omission data
may reflect neuronal processing associated with
frustration. Furthermore, the microstate that uniquely fit
the reward reception data may reflect affective processes
akin to relief for not having to repeat the aversive task.
The current study provides a preliminary attempt at
identifying neural markers which reflect processing of
negative affect. Future studies should develop effective
means of tracking frustration which can then be used in a
correlation to better determine which microstates may be
involved in processing negative affect.
I-57
THE
DEPENDENCE
OF
FAMILIARITY
AND
RECOLLECTION PROCESSES ON THE AFFECTIVE
PROPERTIES OF STIMULI Hugo Sousa, University of
Porto; Mariana Pereira, University of Porto; Tiago Paiva,
University of Porto; Pedro R. Almeida, University of Porto;
Fernando Barbosa, University of Porto; João Marques-Teixeira,
University of Porto - The prioritization of the processing of
information with high motivational value has been
extensively documented in the literature. Event Related
Potential studies tend to demonstrate that both highly
arousing and unpleasant stimuli elicit more attentional
allocation (e.g., Carretie et al., 2004; Cuthbert et al., 1998;
Schupp et al., 2004) at various points in the information
processing stream. This allocation of resources is sought
to, among other processes, facilitate the storage in memory
of information of motivational value (Warring &
Kensinger, 2011) and its subsequent recall (Kensinger &
Schacter, 2007). However, the influence of the emotional
characteristics of the stimuli may operate in distinct
modes on the various components of the memory retrieval
process. On the present study we have characterized the
influence of emotional valence in memory processes, by
relying on an ERP protocol. We have characterized the
FN400 component, involved in familiarity (e.g., Rugg et
al., 1998), and the Late Positive Complex (LPC) that has
been related with recollection (e.g., Curran, 2000). Thirtyfour young adult male participants were exposed to visual
emotional stimuli, rated as Pleasant, Neutral or
Unpleasant from the International Affective Picture
System (IAPS) and were later asked to identify images
that has been displayed, shown among new distracters.
The ERP responses to the Old and Distracter stimuli were

I-56
THE ERP MICROSTATES OF FRUSTRATION Steven R.
Green, Indiana University; Kevin D. Schwartz, Indiana
University; Sharlene D. Newman, Indiana University- One
difficulty in studying affective states in EEG is identifying
relevant signals indicative of an emotional state. For
example, identifying EEG signals that suggest the
presence of a negative affective state, such as frustration,
can prove to be very challenging. Recent advances in
microstate analysis have provided an avenue to find
affective states in the EEG data by revealing topographic
states thought to reflect moments of quasi stable
processing in the brain (Murray, 2008). The current study
employed this analysis to identify microstates related to
the processing of frustration. According to frustration
theory the omission of an expected reinforcer leads to the
transitory aversive experience of frustration (Amsel 1994);
thus, to manipulate frustration negative reinforcers were
omitted. Subjects performed a task in which they had to
identify the correct stimulus in order to avoid having to
repeat an aversive task. Since reinforcers represent
avoiding the repetition of an aversive task, the omission of
them likely elicits frustration. During the experiment we
recorded EEG using a high density system and analyzed
the resulting data to identify microstates unique to the
processing of reward omission. After combining reward
omission and reward reception in order to define a
topographic map over a 1000 ms period beginning with
onset of feedback, segmentation analysis identified 17
unique microstates. Using the topographic template maps,

	  

91	  

analyzed in trials in which correct responses were
obtained. For the FN400 there was an effect of novelty
(F(1,33) = 8.22; p = 0.007) on mean amplitude, with Old
pictures eliciting higher FN400 then Distracters. For the
LPC there was a Valence by Novelty interaction (F(2,66) =
4.38; p = 0.016), with a novelty effect remaining only for
Unpleasant pictures. These results suggest the presence of
a mechanisms for familiarity detection operating
independently of the emotional valence of the stimuli. In
contrast, higher order recollection processes seem to be
sensitive to the motivational properties of the material to
be recognized.

sleep, while Wake participants studied in the morning and
were tested in the evening (~12-hour delay for both
groups). Circadian control participants were tested on the
images in either the morning or evening, after a 20-min
delay. Results: A contrast comparing Hits to studied
objects to Correct Rejections to novel objects defined
several regions of interest (ROI), which were unbiased
with regard to the effect of object valence (negative,
neutral), delay length (20-min, 12-hr) and time-of-testing
(morning, evening). An ANOVA was computed on the
parameter estimates extracted from the ROIs, with the
dependent variable being the difference in activity
between hits and misses to studied objects. ROIs in the
anterior and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (-30 62 6; 52 28
26), inferior and middle temporal gyrus (58 -40 -10; -66 -36
-2), and orbitofrontal cortex (24 42 -12) showed a
significant interaction (p<.05) between delay length (20min, 12-hr) and time-of-testing (morning, evening).
Keeping time-of-testing constant, activity in the anterior
PFC, OFC, and inferior temporal gyrus increased as a
function of delay length only when the delay interval
included time awake (Wake > Circadian-PM, all
t(28)>2.33, p<.027); Sleep = Circadian-AM, all t(26)<1.60,
p>.12). Additionally, activity in the anterior PFC, dlPFC,
and OFC differed as a function of time-of-testing after a
short delay (Circadian-AM > Circadian-PM, all t(21)>2.24
p<.035). Conclusions: These results suggest that after a
period of sleep, the memory retrieval network may be
refined, consistent with Payne & Kensinger (2011).
Additionally, a novel finding is a potential circadian effect
on memory, with Circadian-AM participants showing
greater anterior and dlPFC and OFC activity than
Circadian-PM participants, independent of stimuli
valence. This effect is dampened with a long study-test
delay, suggesting that circadian effects may contribute to
changes in the memory retrieval network for negative and
neutral information.

★

I-58
EFFECTS OF SLEEP AND TIME OF DAY ON
EMOTIONAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL: EVIDENCE
FROM FMRI Kelly Bennion, Boston College; Elizabeth
Kensinger, Boston College; Jessica Payne, The University of
Notre Dame- Purpose: Emotion has long been known to
have an enhancing effect on memory [1]. When emotional
objects are presented as part of a scene, they are selectively
enhanced, and this enhancement becomes intensified over
time [2]. The sleeping brain is thought to provide the
optimal neurochemical environment for memory
consolidation, preserving memory for emotional objects
and resulting in a shift from engagement of a diffuse to a
more refined memory retrieval network [2]. With sleep
research, it is also important to investigate circadian
effects on emotional memory to determine if these
contribute to differences in activity and memory
performance after a delay spent asleep or awake. The
present study examines neural engagement on emotional
memory retrieval as a function of the time of testing
(morning, evening) and study-test delay length (20-min,
12-hrs).
Procedure: Participants viewed 124 scenes
consisting of a negative or neutral object on a neutral
background, prior to a recognition test during fMRI. Sleep
participants studied the images in the evening, prior to

	  

92	  

NOTES	  
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________	  
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

93	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

94	  

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

95	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

	  

96	  

	  

