Social & Affective Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting 2014
April 11-12, The Curtis
Denver, Colorado
Local Organizers
Kateri McRae, University of Denver
Jamil Zaki, Stanford University

Talk/Poster Selection Committee
Elliot Berkman, University of Oregon
Amanda Bruce, University of Missouri
Emily Falk, University of Michigan
Kateri McRae, University of Denver
Leah Somerville, Harvard University
Eva Telzer, University of Illinois
Christian Waugh, Wake Forest University
Jamil Zaki, Stanford University

SANS Executive Committee
Tor Wager, University of Colorado at Boulder
Alexander Todorov, Princeton University
Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin
Mauricio Delgado, Rutgers University
Elliot Berkman, University of Oregon
Andreas Olsson, Karolinska Institute
Leah Somerville, Harvard University
Thalia Wheatley, Dartmouth College

	  

	  

	  

Conference Schedule
Thursday April 10
Start

End

Session

6:00 PM

9:00 PM

Registration

6:30 PM

8:30 PM

Welcome Reception & Cash Bar

Friday April 11
Start

End

Session

8:00 AM

8:50 AM

Continental Breakfast and Registration

8:50 AM

9:00 AM

Welcome

9:00 AM

10:15 AM

Symposium Session A: Intergroup Processes

10:15 AM

10:35 AM

Coffee Break

10:35 AM

11:50 AM

Symposium Session B: Clinical Neuroscience

11:50 AM

1:20 PM

Lunch Break

1:20 PM

2:35 PM

Symposium Session C: Social Affect

2:35 PM

3:50 PM

Poster Session D and Coffee Break

3:50 PM

5:05 PM

Symposium Session E: Developmental Neuroscience

5:05 PM

5:45 PM

Presidential Reception

5:45 PM

7:15 PM

Presidential Symposium: Advances in Fundamental
Affective Neuroscience

Saturday April 12
Start

End

Session

8:00 AM

9:00 AM

Continental Breakfast and Registration

9:00 AM

10:00 AM

Symposium Session F: Computation in Social Neuroscience

10:00 AM

10:25 AM

Coffee Break

10:25 AM

11:45 AM

Keynote Symposium: Perspectives from the “Parent”
Disciplines of Social and Affective Neuroscience

11:45 PM

1:15 PM

Lunch Break

1:15 PM

2:30 PM

Distinguished Scholar Address: Elizabeth A. Phelps

2:30 PM

3:00 PM

Coffee Break

3:00 PM

4:15 PM

Symposium Session G: Basic Affective Processes

4:15 PM

5:30 PM

Poster Session H

5:30 PM

6:45 PM

Symposium Session I: Perceiving Others’ Minds

6:45 PM

7:00 PM

Closing Remarks

7:00 PM

9:00 PM

Closing Reception & Cash Bar
1	  

	  

2014 Awards
Distinguished Scholar Award
Elizabeth A. Phelps, New York University
Innovation Award
McKell R. Carter, Duke University “A distinct role of the temporal-parietal
junction in predicting socially guided decisions”
SANS Poster Travel Awards
Richard B. Lopez, Dartmouth College
Matthew Brook O’Donnell, University of Pennsylvania
Tyler Santander, University of Virginia

2	  

	  

Symposia Presentations
Session A

Intergroup Processes
Friday, April 11, 2014
9:00 - 10:15 AM
Chad Forbes, University of Delaware
Jonathan Freeman, Dartmouth College
Mariska Kret, University of Amsterdam
Tiffany Ito, University of Colorado

ABSTRACTS
UNFORGETTABLE: STEREOTYPE THREAT ENDANGERS ENHANCED CODING OF
NEGATIVE FEEDBACK TO UNDERMINE PERFORMANCE Chad E. Forbes, Kelly Jordan,
Adam Magerman, and Jordan Leitner; University of Delaware – Stereotype threat, a situational
pressure that stereotyped targets experience when they fear their actions may confirm a
negative group stereotype, is known to engender negative emotions, physiological arousal
and hypervigilance for errors. Research on mood congruent memory encoding suggests that
situations like these can facilitate encoding of negative information specifically. Little is
known, however, about how information, be it stereotype confirming or otherwise, is
encoded and recalled under stereotype threat. Five studies examined the hypothesis that
negative, stereotype confirming information presented under stereotype threat would be
encoded more efficaciously than positive information. In Study 1, women completed a math
test they thought was either diagnostic of their math intelligence (stereotype threat
condition) or a problem solving task (control condition) while continuous EEG activity was
recorded. Participants received meaningful feedback after each answer. Source localization
and time-frequency analyses revealed that compared to women in the control condition,
women under stereotype threat exhibited theta bursts in temporal gyrus (TG; a region
integral for spatial working memory) and greater phase locking between the ACC and
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC; regions also integral for working memory) in
response to wrong compared to correct feedback. This pattern was reversed among women
in the control condition. Furthermore, stereotype threatened women performed worse on
the math test to the extent they elicited theta power in TG in response to wrong feedback.
Study 2 extended these findings by examining whether women under stereotype threat
encoded wrong feedback better than correct feedback. Women and men completed a math
test framed as either diagnostic of their math intelligence or a problem solving task and
received feedback after each problem. The feedback presented after each answer, however,
was written in different fonts. A surprise memory test examined whether participants had
seen the wrong or correct feedback (written in a specific font) during the math task.
Stereotype threatened women encoded wrong fonts better than correct fonts and compared
to men and women in the control condition. Men and women in the control condition
exhibited no such bias. Study 3 replicated findings from Study 2 and provided evidence that
even information presented in the periphery of negative feedback is encoded more
efficaciously. Study 4 revealed that these effects persist up to one week after performance
but only for women who are most identified with the math domain. Findings from Studies
2-4 indicated that stereotype threatened women underperformed on a follow-up difficult
math test to the extent they encoded negative feedback on the previous math test. Finally,
Study 5 revealed that stereotype threatened individuals predicted they performed much
3	  

	  

worse than they actually did to the extent they exhibited decreased phase locking between
regions in the default mode network before completing a supposed intelligence test.
Consistent with the mood congruent/stress-induced memory literature, these findings
suggest that stereotype threat renders negative feedback comparable to a physiological
threat, enhancing attention to negative information very early in the information processing
stream to facilitate encoding of negative information, negatively bias performance
perceptions and undermine performance among the stigmatized accordingly.
PERSON PERCEPTION AT THE CROSSROADS OF SOCIAL CATEGORIZATION
Jonathan B. Freeman; Dartmouth College – On catching sight of other people, individuals
spontaneously categorize along a number of social category dimensions, including gender,
race, and emotion. Although often assumed to be independent, in this talk I will show that
social category dimensions interact in meaningful ways to shape the basic way we see
others’ faces. I will present a number of neuroimaging and behavioral studies demonstrating
that gender, race, and emotion categories mutually influence one another due to activated
stereotypes (e.g., Black = hostile) that are incidentally shared across dimensions. Three
studies made use of a novel paradigm in which fMRI was synchronized with a real-time
mouse-tracking technique recording participants’ hand movements en route to category
responses on the screen. Results indicated that, depending on the strength of one’s
stereotypic associations, gender, race, and emotion categories became linked in basic visual
perceptions. Due to stereotypes that male and Black individuals are likely to be aggressive
and hostile, male and Black faces tended to spontaneously activate the angry category and
appear angrier (even when they displayed no anger). Conversely, due to stereotypes that
female and Asian individuals are likely to be docile and appeasing, female and Asian faces
tended to spontaneously activate the happy category and appear happier (even when they
displayed no joy). This was revealed by hand movements’ incorrect, parallel attraction
toward stereotype-associated category responses during early perceptual processing (e.g.,
toward angry response for a happy Black male face). Correlational analyses between
synchronized neuroimaging and hand-movement data showed that the medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) played dissociable roles in
instantiating these social category interactions and subsequently inhibiting them, thereby
allowing faces to be perceived accurately (e.g., to see a happy Black male face as indeed
happy, rather than angry). Finally, multi-voxel pattern analyses (MVPA) characterized the
inherent overlap of these different social category representations (e.g., male, Black, angry;
female, Asian, happy) in lower-level fusiform regions involved in face perception vs. higherorder prefrontal regions involved in stereotype access and top-down visual predictions.
Taken together, this research demonstrates that perceptions of social categories are not
independent but rather systematically interact, and implicates both bottom-up and topdown processes in driving social category interactions. The findings bolster recent
intersectional and dynamic-interactive frameworks for social categorization.
TRUST DEPENDS ON CHANGES IN OTHERS’ PUPIL SIZE VIA PUPIL
SYNCHRONIZATION Mariska E. Kret and A.H. Fischer, University of Amsterdam; T.
Matsuzawa, Kyoto University; and C.K.W. de Dreu, University of Amsterdam – Humans
cooperate with, and extend trust to both familiar and unfamiliar others, thus enabling
ancestral groups and contemporary institutions to function and prosper. Yet to avoid
betrayal, exploitation and subordination, humans must be prepared also to withhold
cooperation and trust, and to punish those who betray and free-ride. Thus, whether
recurrent or one-shot, humans need to assess whether partners are cooperators and worthy
of one’s trust, or instead untrustworthy and likely to exploit one’s cooperative effort.
Sometimes, such assessments can be based on deliberated and effortful considerations. Most
often, however, decisions to trust are relatively fast and mostly intuitive, suggesting that
humans have evolved the capacity to learn associations between tractable partner
characteristics and their (un)trustworthiness, that in new interactions with unknown others
operate as a heuristic device when deciding to cooperate and trust or, instead, to compete
and withhold trust. During social interactions, humans attend to others’ eyes, mimic
expressions, follow gaze and there are indications that they synchronize pupil size. The
communication of delicate eye signals must have become adaptive amongst individuals
who trusted and not abused each other. Indeed, in an eye-tracking study including human
and chimpanzee participants, we showed that humans specifically synchronize their pupil4	  

	  

size with the human and not with the chimpanzee eyes that were presented on a computer
screen. A similar within-species effect was observed for chimpanzee subjects. Seeing a
conspecifics’ pupils dilate signals safety, permitting cooperation and trust; perceiving small
pupils in contrast, inhibits pro-sociality. A possible mechanism is that the own pupils that
synchronize with the partners’ provides immediate neural feedback that the interaction
environment is benign. To test the supposed relation between pupil synchronization and
trust, we designed three experiments in which participants played trust-games with virtual
trustees whose pupils contracted, remained static or dilated. We observed that trust and
cooperation depend not only on emotion signals and group membership, but also on the
partner’s pupil size, with larger and dilating pupils triggering more trust and cooperation
than smaller and contracting pupils. Participants’ pupils synchronized with trustees’
dilating pupils, especially when from the in-group (Caucasian) and expressing happiness.
Participants’ pupil-size decreased following trustees’ contracting pupils, especially when
anger was expressed by the out-group (Asian). Interestingly, the more participants
synchronized with dilating pupils, the more they trusted. Thus, trust not only depended on
characteristics of the partner, but also on participants’ own reaction to that partner and more
specifically on whether they synchronized or not.
A FACE BY ANY OTHER NAME: THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL CATEGORY ON FACE
PERCEPTION Tiffany Ito, University of Colorado – While humans are generally expert with
the category of faces, not all faces are processed the same. One consistent difference that has
been observed occurs as a function of group membership, with ingroup faces typically
processed in a more individuated manner and outgroup faces processed in a more categorybased way. While these differences are thought to produce important behavioral outcomes
such as better memory for ingroup members, the engagement of qualitatively different
processing is not invariant. This talk will review event-related brain potential data that helps
first identify the typical stages of face perception, then illuminate how these differ or are as
the same for ingroup and outgroup faces. Data will also be presented showing the impact of
motivational factors, highlighting both invariant processes in the perception of ingroup and
outgroup faces, as well as processes that are malleable. Implications will also be discussed
for several behavioral phenomena such as the cross-race memory effect and implicit racial
bias.

Session B

Clinical Neuroscience
5	  

	  

Friday, April 11, 2014
10:35 - 11:50 AM
Dorien Enter, Radboud University Nijmegen
Abigail Marsh, Georgetown University
Nicole Giuliani, University of Oregon
Nouchine Hadjikhani, Massachusetts General Hospital

ABSTRACTS
TESTOSTERONE ADMINISTRATION ALLEVIATES SUBMISSIVE GAZE
AVOIDANCE IN SOCIAL ANXIETY Dorien Enter, Radboud University of Nijmegen, Leiden
University; David Terburg, Utrecht University, University of Cape Town; Anita Harrewijn, Leiden
University; Phillip Spinhoven, Leiden University; and Karen Roelofs, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging – Social anxiety may be based on a ubiquitous
social hierarchy system, with patients showing an extreme form of social submissive
behavior. Social anxiety disorder is associated with reduced endogenous testosterone levels
and typical submissive behavior such as gaze avoidance in social encounters.
Administration of testosterone has dominance-enhancing and social-anxiolytic effects, and
has shown to enhance social dominant gaze behavior in healthy participants. Because
avoidance behavior is the major maintaining factor in social anxiety disorder, it is relevant to
test whether administration of testosterone can alleviate gaze avoidance from angry faces. In
a double-blind, within-subject design, medication-free high socially anxious and healthy
control participants received a single dose of 0.5mg testosterone and a matched placebo, at
two separate days. On both days, their gaze behavior was recorded while they looked at
angry, happy, and neutral facial expressions. In high socially anxious subjects testosterone
reduced submissive gaze avoidance as indicated by an increase in first fixations to the eye
region of angry faces. In contrast, in healthy controls testosterone diminished first fixations
to the eye-region in a non-emotion-specific manner. These results suggest that although
testosterone generally decreases social behavior in healthy participants, it promotes
dominant gaze behavior, i.e. eye-contact with angry faces, in high socially anxious
individuals. The findings support previous notions that the effects of testosterone on
dominance seeking behavior are context dependent and may have implications for
treatment studies aiming to boost therapy efficacy in social anxiety disorder.
EMPATHY ON A SLIDING SCALE – IS EXTRAORDINARY ALTRUISM THE INVERSE
OF PSYCHOPATHY? Abigail Marsh, Kristin M. Brethel-Haurwitz, Sarah M. Stoycos, and Elise
M. Cardinale, Georgetown University; Paul Robinson, University of Washington; and John W.
VanMeter, Georgetown University – Altruistic kidney donors volunteer to undergo surgery so
that one of their own healthy kidneys can be transplanted into a needy stranger. Such
donations are relatively rare events and represent a costly, intentional behavior aimed at
benefiting an anonymous, non-kin other, satisfying the most stringent definitions of
altruism. Altruistic kidney donations cannot be readily explained by dominant self-serving
explanations for altruistic behavior, including kin selection, reciprocity, or adherence to
social norms. We hypothesize that extraordinary altruism can be conceptualized as the
extreme end of an empathic continuum that is anchored at the low end by individuals with
psychopathic personality traits. We used structural and functional magnetic resonance
imaging and behavioral testing to assess how extraordinary altruists, all of whom
volunteered to donate a kidney to a stranger, differ from healthy controls matched for age,
sex, race and ethnicity, and cognitive intelligence. Previous investigations of psychopathy
have consistently found that, relative to controls, individuals with psychopathic traits are
less sensitive to cues indicating others’ emotional distress (such as fearful facial expressions)
both behaviorally and in terms of neural responsiveness, particularly in the amygdala.
6	  

	  

Structural imaging studies have also found that psychopathic individuals possess smaller
amygdalae than controls. We observed structural and functional differences in altruistic
kidney donors consistent with the characterization of these individuals as “antipsychopaths”: they exhibited heightened amygdala responses to fearful (but not angry)
facial expressions, and this increased amygdala responsiveness appeared to be responsible
for their greater sensitivity to the expressions; across the sample, amygdala responses to
fearful expressions during the implicit processing task were positively correlated with the
ability to recognize these expressions in a separate task conducted outside the scanner. In
addition, group differences in amygdala volume were observed. After controlling for group
differences in cerebral volume, altruists’ right amygdalae were significantly larger than
those of controls. We discuss our findings in light of observed differences and similarities in
the moral judgments, economic decision-making, and personality structure of altruists and
controls. These findings support the possibility of a neurobiological basis for extraordinary
altruism, and indicate that extraordinary altruists exhibit structural and functional brain
differences from controls that are consistent with altruism being a continuously distributed
trait. These data may also be important for understanding empathic processes generally, in
particular the role of nonverbal distress cues like fearful facial expressions in eliciting
empathic and altruistic responses from observers.
ASSESSING REAL-WORLD BEHAVIORS IN THE LAB: INSIGHTS FROM EATING
REGULATION RESEARCH – Nicole Giuliani, University of Oregon; Traci Mann, University of
Minnesota; A. Janet Tomiyama, University of California, Los Angeles; and Elliot T. Berkman,
University of Oregon - Neuroscientists carefully design protocols to isolate processes of
interest, but by creating such tight control we might be missing how behaviors in the
laboratory differ from behaviors in the real world. For example, people are not randomly
assigned to situations but rather create idiosyncratic life structures consistent with our own
abilities, preferences, and goals. This might be particularly true in the case of food choice
and dieting. Here, we simulated the effect of the daily self-regulation involved in dieting by
instructing half of a large sample (N=50) to restrict their consumption of a personally chosen
energy-dense (ED) target food for two weeks. The other half monitored but did not restrict
their consumption. Immediately before this, both groups completed a baseline scan in which
they reappraised their craving for a personally relevant ED food (Giuliani et al., 2013). We
then assessed real-world consumption of ED foods in the entire sample in two ways: selfreported everyday consumption of the target food via daily text messaging for two weeks
after the scan (‘in vivo’), and number of grams of ED food spontaneously consumed in the
laboratory at the end of the two week period (‘in lab’). The relationship between regulationrelated neural activation at baseline and subsequent consumption was different between the
two groups (i.e., group-by-activation interactions) for both measures of consumption. For in
vivo consumption (controlling for hunger), greater left inferior frontal gyrus activity during
reappraisal predicted lower everyday consumption in the non-restrict group, but not in the
restrict group. For in lab eating, the interaction revealed that greater activity in right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during reappraisal predicted greater consumption in the
restrict group, but less consumption in the non-restrict group. Together, greater regulationrelated brain activity predicted lower in vivo and in lab ED consumption among non-dieting
participants, but higher in lab ED consumption among dieting participants. These results
demonstrate the importance of assessing complex phenomena like eating in multiple
contexts and the divergent predictive validity of initial neural activity.
EMOTIONAL CONTAGION IN AUTISM, AND SOME NEW HOPES IN AUTISM
THERAPY Nouchine Hadjikhani, Massachusetts General Hospital – A lack of empathy is often
considered to be a hallmark of autism. Empathic concern consists of both emotional and
cognitive processes. Cognitive processes associated with the perception of ‘classical’ facial
expression are affected in autism, as has been shown in many studies. A lack of activation of
mirror mechanisms has been reported in this type of paradigms, and some have
hypothesized that a deficient mirror system may be underlying social difficulties in autism.
Here, we used fMRI to examine the spontaneous reaction to the perception of facial
expression of pain in 38 participants with autism and 35 matched controls. We observed no
statistical differences between groups in activation of the areas involved in pain sharing,
showing intact emotional contagion in autism. Our findings demonstrate that mirror
mechanisms can be spontaneously elicited during the perception of pain in autism, and that
7	  

	  

a ‘broken mirror system’ is probably not at the very basis of their difficulties. In addition, we
found that at a more liberal threshold participants with autism had increased activation in
areas involved in cognitive reappraisal. An imbalance between affective and cognitive
processes, resulting in the need to increase reappraisal mechanisms in order to limit
personal distress resulting from emotional contagion may be at the basis of the apparent
lack of caring behavior in people with autism. There is no drug treatment available so far to
improve social perception in autism. Three studies have recently shown that bumetanide, an
‘old’ molecule known for its diuretic effect, may be a new promising therapy in autism.
Bumetanide reduces the level of chlorine in neurons, restoring the inhibitory effect of GABA
that seems to be compromised in autism. I will present data from a proof-of-concept pilot
study showing that 10 months of treatment with bumetanide improves perception of social
facial expression in autism.

Session C

Social Affect
Friday, April 11, 2014
1:20 - 2:35 PM
8	  

	  

Andreas Olsson, Karolinska Institute
Janine Dutcher, University of California, Los Angeles
Cendri Hutcherson, California Institute of Technology
Jim Coan, University of Virginia

ABSTRACTS
OTHERS AS MEANS TO A SAFE END: MECHANISMS OF VICARIOUS EXTINCTION
LEARNING Andreas Olsson, Armita Golkar, Ida Selbing, Olof Hjort, and Vasco Castro; Karolinska
Institute - Learning about what is safe and potentially dangerous in the environment
through social means, such as observing others, can be both safer and more efficient than
learning through individual trial and error. Recent research has contributed to a growing
understanding of observational (vicarious) acquisition of fears, showing both similarities
and differences as compared to directly experienced (Pavlovian) fear conditioning.
However, little is known about the ways social observation can promote safety learning, and
to what degree this form of vicarious learning is similar to traditional extinction learning.
During traditional extinction, learned fear is diminished through repeated direct exposure to
unreinforced presentations of the feared conditioned stimuli (CS). During vicarious
extinction, learned fear is instead diminished by watching another individual
(‘demonstrator’) acting non-fearfully to presentations of the CS. Here, we present three
studies on vicarious extinction, examining (1) its effectiveness as compared to traditional
extinction, (2) its underlying neural networks, and (3) its dependence on social cognition.
Study 1 showed that, following fear conditioning, participants submitted to vicarious, as
compared to traditional, extinction learning improved the extinction and effectively blocked
the recovery of conditioned fear as measured by the skin conductance response (SCR). The
presence of a demonstrator per se was not sufficient to demonstrate superior extinction
learning. Instead, the superiority of vicarious extinction was dependent on the experience
that the demonstrator was safe. Study 2 used a within-group paradigm to examine the
neural mechanisms of vicarious extinction learning using fMRI. Following fear conditioning
to two stimuli (CS+1 and CS+2), participants watched a demonstrator receiving shocks to
the CS+1, but not to the CS+2 and a control stimulus (CS-). During the test-phase, all stimuli
were again presented to the participants, this time without any shocks. Preliminary results
support the strength of vicarious extinction and implicate a network of brain regions that
has previously been associated with the expression of learned fear. Study 3 examined how
the social (racial) group belonging of the demonstrator during vicarious extinction affected
safety learning. Replicating Study 1, we showed that vicarious extinction effectively
extinguished previously conditioned fear. Importantly, however, this was only the case
when the demonstrator belonged to the same racial group as the learner, highlighting the
dependence on social information during social safety learning. Taken together, our results
provide important clues towards a better understanding of the social cognitive and affective
processes underlying social safety learning with implications for real world applications.
ADMINISTRATION OF VASOPRESSIN INCREASES EMPATHY AND POSITIVE
EMOTIONS WHILE RECALLING AN INSTANCE OF PROVIDING SUPPORT Janine M.
Dutcher, Diana M. Wang, Benjamin Tabak, Meghan L. Meyer, Elizabeth Castle, Michael R. Irwin,
Matthew D. Lieberman, and Naomi I. Eisenberger; University of California, Los Angeles - There has
been increased interest in neuropeptides and their effect on social behavior. However, there
have not been many vasopressin administration studies in humans that investigate the role
vasopressin plays in social behavior. Animal work has found that vasopressin may be
related to more male-specific behaviors, including aggression (Heinrichs, von Dawanes &
Domes, 2009). Some recent work has found that vasopressin increases social recognition in
male rats, as well as human males (For a Review see Zink & Meyer-Lindenberg, 2012).
However, due to the small numbers of vasopressin administration studies with humans, it is
unclear what effect vasopressin has on women. In addition, the effect of vasopressin in a
9	  

	  

positive social context is not yet known. Many animal studies inject vasopressin into the
septal area of the brain, due to the number of vasopressin-specific receptors in this region.
Interestingly, recent human neuroimaging work has indicated this region may be important
in both prosocial behavior and empathy (Morelli, Rameson & Lieberman, 2012). Therefore, it
is possible that vasopressin may lead to alterations in empathic and prosocial behavior. We
conducted a (double-blind, intranasal) vasopressin administration study in which
participants were asked to write about a recent time when they provided support to another
person. Participants were prompted to write about their thoughts and feelings during this
instance. Two trained coders, who were blind to participant condition, were then asked to
code the essays for: 1) how empathic the author was towards the target of their support, and
2) to what extent the author expressed feeling good about helping the other person. The
coders had good inter-rater reliability. Results indicate that vasopressin increases how
empathic the author is towards the target of their support compared to placebo. In addition,
vasopressin increases the extent to which the author describes feeling good about helping
the target of their support. Specifically, results were the same for males and females. These
findings suggest a novel role for vasopressin in human social behavior.
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL AND UTILITARIAN CONSIDERATIONS
IN MORAL DECISION-MAKING Cendri Hutcherson*, Leila Montaser-Kouhsari*, and Antonio
Rangel; California Institute of Technology - Current theories of moral decision-making posit
that it results from the interaction between intuitive emotional responses to moral and
immoral actions and deliberative consideration of the consequences of those acts. Based on
neural activation during moral judgment, researchers have inferred the existence of distinct
neural circuits related to these two aspects of judgment. Yet no study has directly examined
the neural computations that support these different considerations, or how they are
integrated into an overall judgment of moral appropriateness. To investigate this issue, we
constructed a set of different harmful and beneficial scenarios (i.e. harm - Torture a captured
terrorist; benefit - Save Los Angeles from nuclear attack) that could be viewed separately
and recombined into different moral dilemmas. We then scanned participants using
functional magnetic resonance imaging as they completed three tasks: 1) rating each
individual harm and benefit for how good or bad it felt at an intuitive, emotional level
(emotional ratings), 2) rating each harm and benefit for how good or bad its consequences
were (utilitarian ratings) and 3) deciding the appropriateness of making different moral
tradeoffs (a harm committed in order to achieve a benefit). Behaviorally, we observed that
emotional and utilitarian ratings explained independent and equivalent portions of the
variance in appropriateness judgments, but that benefits were weighed less than harms (i.e.
a ‘moral loss aversion’ effect). Neurally, we observed distinct neural networks correlating
with emotional and utilitarian ratings. Even though viewing the same scenarios, emotional
ratings made during the emotional rating task correlated with activation in regions of insula,
superior temporal gyrus, and rostral anterior cingulate cortex, while utilitarian ratings made
during the utilitarian rating task correlated with regions of dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
and temporoparietal junction. Using these regions as functionally defined ROIs, we showed
that they continued to uniquely code emotional and utilitarian considerations respectively
while participants made appropriateness judgments in the moral tradeoff task. Moreover,
these regions demonstrated functional connectivity with a more anterior portion of medial
prefrontal cortex whose activation correlated with the overall perceived appropriateness of
the tradeoff (consistent with an integration function). Intriguingly, analysis of the temporal
dynamics of activation in this integrative mPFC region indicated that harms were
represented more quickly than benefits, providing a mechanistic explanation for the ‘moral
loss aversion’ effect. Taken together, these results suggest that moral judgment may be the
results of dynamically computed, weighted integration of emotional and utilitarian
considerations. (*co-first authors)
SOCIAL BASELINE THEORY: EMOTIONAL REGULATION AND RESPONDING
WHEN ME BECOMES WE Jim Coan, University of Virginia – Social proximity, peer bonding
and soothing behaviors facilitate the development of non-anxious temperament, attenuate
cardiovascular arousal, inhibit the release of stress hormones, reduce threat-related neural
activation and may even extend the life-span. Conversely, social subordination, rejection
and isolation are powerful sources of emotional stress. Data from our own laboratory
suggests proximity familiar others—romantic partners, friends and relatives—attenuates
10	  

	  

both activating and regulatory neural responses to threats directed at the self. On the other
hand, we have observed that threats directed at familiar others produce neural responses
that are 1) very similar to those observed when threats are directed at the self, and 2)
substantially different than those observed when threats are directed at strangers. Although
many neural mechanisms of these and similar effects have been proposed, few (or none)
have been unequivocally identified. Among the mechanisms considered for this talk
concerns what Aron and colleagues have called the “inclusion of the other into the self”.
This talk will briefly review evidence from our laboratory that relationships imply an
overlap between self and other that both increases the bioenergetic resources available to the
self and extends the risk of losing bioenergetic resources to those we know and love. In
reviewing this evidence, I will introduce Social Baseline Theory, a perspective that
emphasizes the economy of action and perception/action links in integrating diverse
literatures on the neural systems supporting attachment, empathy and emotion regulation.

Session D

Poster Presentations: Session 1
Friday, April 11, 2014
2:35 – 3:50 PM
See page 25 for abstracts

Session E

Developmental Neuroscience
Friday, April 11, 2014
3:50 – 5:05 PM
Bernd Figner, Radboud University Nijmegen

11	  

	  

Berna Guroglu, Leiden University
Pilyoung Kim, University of Denver
Nim Tottenham, Columbia University

ABSTRACTS
EXPECTED RISKS AND RETURNS IN CHILDRENS’, ADOLESCENTS’, AND ADULTS’
DYNAMIC RISKY CHOICE: BEHAVIORAL EFFECTS AND NEURAL CORRELATES
Bernd Figner*, Radboud University Nijmegen, Columbia University; Anna C. van Duijvenvoorde*,
Leiden University, University of Amsterdam; Leah H. Somerville, Harvard University; Alisa Powers,
Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Cornell University; Isabel Woyke, Radboud
University Nijmegen; Wouter Weeda, University of Amsterdam; Mauricio R. Delgado, Rutgers
University; B.J. Casey, Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Cornell University; Elke
U. Weber, Columbia University; and Hilde M. Huizenga, University of Amsterdam – Many risky
behaviors start and/or peak during adolescence and young adulthood, which has been
explained by an imbalance between affective-motivational versus cognitive-control
processes, caused by differential subcortical versus prefrontal maturational trajectories.
Empirical support for this neurodevelopmental model based on a still small number of
studies has been mixed, while there is a growing need to more thoroughly examine the
psychological and neural mechanisms underlying adolescent risk taking. To investigate
overt risk taking and its underlying processes, we decomposed risky choices into the
theoretically meaningful components of the risk-return model, which describes risky choice
as a function of expected returns (expected value; EV) and expected risks (outcome
variability; here operationalized as SD) of the available choice options. In an fMRI-scanner,
23 children (M=9.6 years), 25 adolescents (M=17.3 years), and 24 adults (M=27.7 years)
played an fMRI-adjusted version of a dynamic risky-choice task, the hot Columbia Card
Task, previously shown to substantially involve affective processes, hypothesized to play a
crucial role in adolescent risk taking. Behavioral data were analyzed with generalized linear
mixed-models, with binary choices (take another card versus stop) as dependent variable
and EV and SD as predictors of main interest. Higher EV increased the probability to take a
card in all age groups, i.e., all ages liked greater returns. This "return sensitivity" increased
linearly across age groups. Higher SD decreased the probability to take a card, i.e., all age
groups disliked greater risk, exhibiting risk-aversion. However, this risk-aversion was
virtually absent in children (indicating risk-insensitivity), but present in adolescents and
adults, with adolescents showing substantial individual differences. fMRI analyses
investigated age-independent effects of EV and SD in whole-brain analyses across all
participants and age-differences in tracking risks and returns. Return-tracking was expected
in regions previously shown to be sensitive to reward and value, including ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), and ventral striatum (VS).
Regions such as the dorsal medial PFC, insula, and thalamus have been implicated in
probability and risk. As expected, whole-brain analyses showed that increasing returns led
to increased vmPFC, PCC, and VS activations. Increasing risk led, as expected, to increased
activation in insula, dorsal medial PFC, thalamus, and striatal regions. Age-analyses showed
that return-related vmPFC and VStr activations increased with age, whereas superior
parietal regions showed a quadratic effect. For risk, quadratic age effects were observed in
insula and dorsal medial PFC, indicating greatest risk-sensitivity in adolescents. In sum,
return-sensitivity increased monotonically across age and was associated with activation in
(cortical and subcortical) value-coding regions. Risk-sensitivity was absent in children, but
increased steeply from childhood to adolescence. Risk-sensitivity was associated with
activations in regions previously implicated in tracking probability and outcome variability
and showed predominantly quadratic age effects. These results, together with the riskreturn tradeoff framework, substantially advance the field of developmental decision
neuroscience, as such approaches allow for a more precise understanding and
operationalization of the psychological and neural mechanisms underlying individual and
age differences in overt risk-taking levels by decomposing them into meaningful
components.
12	  

	  

HOW CHILDHOOD PEER ACCEPTANCE AND REJECTION RELATE TO NEURAL
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL EXCLUSION DURING ADOLESCENCE Geert-Jan Will,
Leiden University, Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition; Pol van Lier, VU University;
Eveline A. Crone, Leiden University, Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, University
of Amsterdam; Berna Güro lu, University of Amsterdam - Chronic rejection by peers has
been linked to a variety of negative outcomes, including poor academic achievement and an
increased incidence of depression, anxiety and aggressive behavior. Chronic exposure to
negative treatment that accompanies a rejected status (e.g. being ignored, harassed or
excluded) might alter subjective reactions to acute rejection experiences (e.g. social
exclusion) and this could in turn influence the impact of those experiences on psychosocial
adjustment. This functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) study investigated neural
responses to social exclusion in adolescents (age 12-15) who either experienced chronic
acceptance (n = 27) or rejection (n = 17) by their peers during childhood. After first being
included and then excluded in a virtual ball-tossing game (Cyberball) by unfamiliar peers,
participants reported feeling distressed, independent of long-term childhood acceptance or
rejection. Neuroimaging results showed that across the sample social exclusion was
associated with increased activity in brain regions associated with processing affect and
emotion regulation, such as ventral anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), striatum and
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC). Chronically rejected adolescents showed: 1) increased
activity in the dorsal ACC during social exclusion and 2) increased activation in the presupplementary motor area/ACC and anterior PFC when they did not receive the ball during
a social interaction in which they were included, suggesting a hypersensitivity to rejection.
Taken together, our results show that a brief episode of social exclusion is highly distressing
for adolescents and that childhood peer relations are associated with differential neural
processing of social exclusion during adolescence.
HOW CHILDHOOD POVERTY IMPACTS ADULT NEURAL FUNCTIONS FOR
EMOTION REGULATION Pilyoung Kim, Department of Psychology, University of Denver;
Gary W. Evans, Departments of Design and Environmental Analysis and of Human Development,
Cornell University; Michael Angstadt, Shaun S. Ho, Chandra S. Sripada, James E. Swain, Israel
Liberzon, Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan; and K. Luan Phan, Department of
Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago – One fifth of America's children grow up in
poverty. Childhood poverty has pervasive negative physical and psychological health
sequelae among children. Furthermore, childhood poverty has long-term adverse effects on
health because childhood poverty predicts adult morbidity irrespective of adult poverty.
Exposure to chronic stressors may be one underlying mechanism for childhood poverty‚
health relations by influencing emotion regulatory systems. Although a wealth of literature
suggests that chronic stress injures normal brain development, the prospective effects of
childhood poverty on brain development have not been well understood. In this talk, I will
present a longitudinal fMRI study investigating the relations between childhood poverty
and neural coordinates of emotion regulation. In this longitudinal fMRI study of 49 young
adult participants, we examined associations between childhood poverty at age 9 and adult
neural circuitry activation during emotion regulation at age 24. To test developmental
timing, concurrent, adult income was included as a covariate. Adults with lower family
income at age 9 exhibited reduced ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity
and failure to suppress amygdala activation during effortful regulation of negative emotion
at age 24. In contrast to childhood income, concurrent adult income was not associated with
neural activity during emotion regulation. Furthermore, chronic stressor exposure across
childhood (at age 9, 13, and 17) mediated the relations between family income at age 9 and
ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity at age 24. The findings demonstrate
the significance of childhood chronic stress exposures in predicting neural outcomes during
emotion regulation in adults who grew up in poverty. The information on the
developmental timing of poverty effects and neural mechanisms may inform interventions
aimed at reducing health disparities.
HUMAN AMYGDALA – PFC CIRCUIT DEVELOPMENT Nim Tottenham, Columbia
University – Strong evidence indicates that reciprocal connections between the amygdala
and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) support fundamental aspects of emotional behavior.
Despite the central role that this circuitry plays in regulating emotions in adulthood, little is
known regarding human amygdala-mPFC development. In this talk, I will present
13	  

	  

developmental functional magnetic resonance imaging data describing age-related changes
in amygdala-mPFC circuitry throughout childhood and adolescence and how they relate to
emergent emotion regulation. I will focus on both typical development as well as
development following maternal deprivation (e.g., orphanage care), showing that early life
stress may accelerate development of this circuitry. The findings presented are highly
consistent with the animal literature showing both large changes in amygdala-mPFC
circuitry throughout childhood/adolescence, as well as the large influence of maternal care
in shaping this neural circuitry. These age-related changes will be discussed in terms of
potential developmental sensitive periods for environmental influence.

_____________________________________________________________________________

Presidential Symposium

Advances in fundamental affective neuroscience
Friday, April 11, 2014
5:45 – 7:15 PM
Speakers: Suzanne Haber and Howard Fields

ABSTRACT
Reward and pain are the fundamental affective forces that drive learning and behavior.
They are the building blocks of emotion, social cognition, and decision-making, and we will
not understand these complex human edifices without delving into the bedrock upon which
they are built. Currently, we are undergoing a revolution in our understanding of the
affective brain, fomented by methodological advances and rapidly developing models of
cortical-subcortical circuits. This symposium features work at the forefront of these
advances. The speakers describe parallel affective systems that span cortex, basal ganglia,
and brainstem. These systems are increasingly anatomically differentiated, but their
functions cut across domains, blurring the distinctions between affect and cognition and
providing an increasingly integrated account of healthy and pathological behavior.
_____________________________________________________________________________

Session F

Computation in Social Neuroscience
Saturday, April 12, 2014
9:00 - 10:00 AM
Damian Stanley, California Institute of Technology
Luke Chang, University of Colorado
Damon Tomlin, Princeton University

14	  

	  

ABSTRACTS
fMRI SIGNALS IN DIFFERENT ‘SOCIAL BRAIN’ REGIONS REFLECT DISTINCT
COMPUTATIONS SPECIFIC TO LEARNING ABOUT PEOPLE Damian A. Stanley,
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute of Technology - Learning about
other peoples’ attributes, e.g. whether an individual is generous or selfish, is central to
human social cognition. A sizable neuroimaging literature has shown that a network of
regions, including the temporal parietal junction, the anterior temporal lobes, the precuneus
and medial prefrontal cortex is reliably engaged when we think about other people.
However, both the computational roles these regions play in learning about other people,
and the extent to which these roles might be specific to social processing, remain poorly
understood. We investigated this question using a task in which participants learned about
other peoples’ generosity by watching them make social decisions. In an event-related fMRI
design, participants observed four ‘Gifters‘ across many trials as they decided whether or
not to share $10 with 3rd party partners (whose identity varied across trials). In a
computationally-matched, non-social control condition, participants learned the win/loss
rates of four lotteries played by the same partners. Importantly, participants themselves
received no rewards from the Gifters or lotteries. While fMRI activity in many regions
reflected general learning computations for both Gifters and lotteries, signals in components
of the social cognition network, notably the left temporal pole, and precuneus, reflected
computations specific to learning about Gifters’ generosity (and not lottery win/loss rates).
Specifically, activity in the left temporal pole reflected participants’ ongoing estimates of
Gifter predictability, while activity in the precuneus reflected participants’ prediction error
(i.e. surprise) in response to Gifter decisions. Preliminary data from a second social learning
paradigm investigated how social learning processes are impaired in high-functioning
adults with autism spectrum disorder. These findings contribute to a larger body of
research on person perception, providing a more nuanced understanding of the specific
computations performed by regions of the ‘social brain’ when we learn about other people.
PICTURE INDUCED NEGATIVE EMOTION PATTERN DIFFERENTIATES AVERSIVE
EXPERIENCES Luke Chang, University of Colorado; Peter Gianaros, Steve Manuck, University of
Pittsburgh; Anjali Krishnan, Tor D. Wager, University of Colorado - Emotions describe a class of
internal motivational states that are critical to our survival. Emotional dysregulation is at the
heart of much of psychopathology, and thus understanding the bio-psycho-social
mechanisms underlying emotions is paramount to not only improving diagnoses and
treatment for mental health issues, but also in addressing fundamental questions about the
motivations underlying social behavior. Neuroscience promises to identify brain-based
biomarkers that are endophenotypes of emotion and its dysregulation. These markers must
be consistent across the population and specific to types of emotion and not other constructs.
In this study we use computational machine learning methods to develop a multivariate
pattern of brain weights that are predictive of affective ratings in response to viewing
stimuli from the International Affective Picture System. We used penalized principal
components regression to identify a distributed pattern of fMRI activity, which we term the
Picture Induced Negative Emotion Signature (PINES), that increases with negative affective
ratings in 100% of training sample (n=122) in cross-validated analysis. The PINES increased
parametrically with negative affect across the entire range of ratings, and also increased
with negative affect in 100% of test subjects (n=61) reserved as a separate holdout set. The
PINES is uncorrelated with patterns related to pain (the Neurologic Pain Signature; Wager
et al. 2013 NEJM) and other salient events (the ventral attention “salience” network; Yeo et
al., 2011), which are unable to predict affective ratings. Moreover, the PINES appears to be a
distributed representation of the affective experience and does not simply reflect average
activation within affective ROIs: It is virtually orthogonal to the average ROI activity within
important regions of interest (e.g., amygdala, insula, dorsal anterior cingulate). Finally, and
importantly, the PINE pattern does not generalize to other aversive experiences such as
experiencing thermal pain (n=28) suggesting that it may be specific to viewing negative
affective images. This study provides the first candidate brain-based marker of emotion that
is a) consistent across a large number of subjects (N = 183) and b) unrelated to general
arousal or salience. This work provides a foundation to test the generality of this pattern
across other types of induction methods and emotional experiences, leading towards a
brain-based taxonomy of affective processes.
15	  

	  

GROUP FORAGING TASK REVEALS NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF SOCIAL
INFLUENCE Damon Tomlin, Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado; Andrea Nedic,
Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University; Deborah Prentice, Department of
Psychology, Princeton University; Phillip Holmes, Department of Electrical Engineering,
Department of Applied Mathematics, Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University; and
Jonathan D. Cohen, Department of Psychology, Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton
University - Conformity to group norms has been shown to perturb human judgment in
many contexts. We used a multi-person foraging task to examine such phenomena and their
relationship to underlying neural mechanisms. Groups of five participants earned monetary
rewards by individually choosing between two options of unknown value while
simultaneously undergoing functional brain imaging. In order to measure the impact of
social information, participants were given information about the performance of the others
as the task progressed. Several regions exhibited graded responses to misalignment with
others in the group (‘marginality’), whether in choices or payoffs. BOLD signals from one
structure in particular, the bilateral insula, were found to predict choice behavior in relation
to marginality. Our findings contribute to the growing body of evidence regarding the brain
structures involved in the processing of social information, and demonstrate the utility of
methods that may help enrich research in this area.

Keynote Symposium
Perspectives from the “parent” disciplines of social and
affective neuroscience
Saturday, April 12, 2014
10:25 – 11:45 AM
Speakers: Lisa Feldman Barrett and John Gabrieli

ABSTRACT
Social and affective neuroscience has, in a manner of speaking, reached adolescence, as an
active research domain for well over a decade. At this stage, it is often easy to forget one’s
“parents,” in this case the parent disciplines of social psychology and cognitive neuroscience
from which our field was born. Nonetheless, these parent disciplines offer valuable
perspective on the priorities, approaches, and techniques that might optimally support
16	  

	  

social and affective neuroscientists in designing and implementing their research. In this
Keynote Symposium, world-renowned scholars in cognitive neuroscience and social
psychology—John Gabrieli (MIT) and Lisa Feldman Barrett (Northeastern)—will offer such
perspective, and identify philosophical and practical lessons that social and affective
neuroscientists can draw from the fields in which our work is rooted.
_________________________________________________________________________________

Distinguished Scholar Address
From animal models to attitudes
Saturday, April 12, 2014
1:15 – 2:30 PM
Speaker: Elizabeth A. Phelps

ABSTRACT
Animal models of fear learning provide a basis for understanding human fears. This
research has demonstrated that the amygdala is necessary for the acquisition, storage and
expression of fear learning. This talk will explore how the neural mechanisms identified in
animal models are consistent with human brain function and extend this research to the
complex social situations typical of human experience. I will first describe how the
mechanisms of simple associative fear learning extend to the social acquisition of fear in
humans and may play a role in the expression of race attitudes. I will then focus on how
fear, once acquired, can be diminished. Extinction and emotion regulation can be used to
control fear via inhibitory signals from the prefrontal cortex to the amygdala. A similar
circuitry has been implicated in the control of race attitudes. One drawback of these
techniques is that fears are only inhibited and can return, with one factor being stress. A
more lasting means to control fear may be to target the fear memory itself through
influencing reconsolidation. I will present evidence suggesting that the behavioral
interference of reconsolidation in humans persistently inhibits fear and diminishes
involvement of the prefrontal cortex inhibitory circuitry.
_________________________________________________________________________________

Session G

Basic Affective Processes
Saturday, April 12, 2014
3:00 – 4:15 PM
Philip Kragel, Duke University
Harma Meffert, National Institutes of Health
Fiona Kumfor, Neuroscience Research Australia
Paul Whalen, Dartmouth College

ABSTRACTS
17	  

	  

MULTIVARIATE REPRESENTATIONS OF DISCRETE EMOTIONS IN THE HUMAN
BRAIN Philip A. Kragel and Kevin S. LaBar, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of
Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University - Understanding how neural activity signifies
emotional states, either along continuous dimensions such as valence or arousal, or discrete
categories such as fear and anger, is a fundamental question in affective neuroscience.
Although neuroimaging studies have identified neural substrates consistently associated
with emotion categories, little evidence supports emotion specificity within any single brain
region. While this lack of specificity may be taken to refute discrete models, it may stem
from inherent limitations of the univariate framework commonly used to identify
biomarkers of emotion. An emerging body of work suggests that multivariate classification
offers a more suitable framework for testing the predictions of theories of emotion and
identifying specific markers of emotional states. Here we examine how distinct affective
states are reflected in whole-brain patterns of central neural activation. During fMRI
scanning, participants viewed cinematic films and music clips intended to elicit amusement,
contentment, surprise, fear, anger, sadness, and neutral states. Following each induction,
participants rated their experience of emotion using a self-report scale containing both
categorical and dimensional items. Machine learning models were constructed to identify
patterns of neural activation capable of specifying the emotional state of participants. Signal
detection measures indicated classification performance was significantly above chance
levels. Further, regression coefficients from machine learning models revealed distinct
networks that reliably predicted the occurrence of each emotion. For example, instances of
fear were associated with increased activation in a number of regions including amygdala,
inferotemporal cortex, anterior cingulate, posterior cingulate, and right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex. Amusement, on the other hand, was predicted by clusters of activation in
medial occipital cortex, bilateral superior temporal gyrus, thalamus, superior-, and middlefrontal cortex. Comparisons between errors in classifying patterns of neural activation
indicate that fewer errors were committed on instances that were rated as most different on
categorical measures of emotional experience, whereas instances that differed in terms of
valence and arousal were associated with a greater number of errors. These findings suggest
that unique components of emotional experience are grounded in distinct neural circuitry
and demonstrate the efficacy of statistical learning methods in characterizing the nature of
affect in the brain.
PREDICTION ERRORS TO EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS: THE ROLES OF THE
AMYGDALA IN SOCIAL REFERENCING Harma Meffert, Section of Affective and Cognitive
Neuroscience, National Institutes of Health; Sarah J. Brislin, Clinical Psychology Program, Florida
State University; Stuart F. White, Section of Affective and Cognitive Neuroscience, National
Institutes of Health; James R. Blair, Section of Affective and Cognitive Neuroscience, National
Institutes of Health - Social referencing paradigms in humans (Klinnert et al., 1986; Aktar et
al., 2013) and observational learning paradigms in animals (Mineka and Cook, 1993) suggest
that emotional expressions are important for communicating valence. It has been proposed
that these expressions initiate stimulus-reinforcement learning (Blair, 2003). Relatively little
is known about the role of emotional expressions in reinforcement learning, particularly in
the context of social referencing. In this study, we examined object valence learning in the
context of a social referencing paradigm. Participants viewed objects and faces that turned
towards the objects and displayed a fearful, happy or neutral reaction to them, whilst
judging the gender of these faces. Notably, amygdala activation was larger when the
expressions following an object were less expected. Moreover, when asked, participants
were both more likely to want to approach, and showed stronger amygdala responses to,
objects associated with happy relative to objects associated with fearful expressions. This
suggests that the amygdala plays two roles in social referencing: (i) initiating learning
regarding the valence of an object as a function of prediction errors to expressions displayed
towards this object; and (ii) orchestrating an emotional response to the object when value
judgments are being made regarding this object.
EXPLORING THE EFFECT OF EMOTION ON MEMORY IN DEMENTIA SYNDROMES
Fiona Kumfor, Neuroscience Research Australia, School of Medical Sciences, University of New
South Wales, ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, University of New South
Wales; Muireann Irish, Neuroscience Research Australia, ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition
and its Disorders, University of New South Wales, School of Psychology, University of New South
18	  

	  

Wales; John R. Hodges, and Olivier Piguet, Neuroscience Research Australia, School of Medical
Sciences, University of New South Wales, ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders,
University of New South Wales - Events that are imbued with emotion are preferentially
processed, resulting in these events being recalled more vividly and with greater confidence
than non-emotional events. Converging evidence suggests that a trade-off for information
central to an emotional event exists, with emotionally-salient central stimuli capturing
attention and being remembered at the expense of peripheral information. Dementia
syndromes offer a unique model to study the neurobiological basis of the interaction
between emotion and memory and potential trade-off effects, given the differential
impairment of memory and emotion across dementia syndromes. Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
affects the medial temporal and posterior cingulate cortices, manifesting as an early and
profound deficit in episodic memory. In contrast, in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) the
medial prefrontal and anterior temporal lobes are affected in the early stages, and clinically,
patients show pervasive deficits in emotional functioning, behaviour and personality. We
aimed to examine memory for emotional and neutral stories in these dementia syndromes
and to determine how emotion influences memory for central and peripheral details across
these patient groups. Fourteen AD, 13 FTD, and 12 controls viewed either an emotionally
arousing or a closely matched emotionally neutral story. Multiple-choice recognition for
total memory, central, and peripheral details was assessed after a 1-hour delay. Memory for
the alternate story was assessed two weeks later. All participants underwent high-resolution
structural brain magnetic resonance imaging. Both patient groups and controls subjectively
rated the stories similarly for emotional content and level of understanding. Importantly, the
impact of emotion on memory differed across groups. Although both AD and FTD patients
remembered fewer details compared to controls, only the AD group showed emotional
enhancement of total memory (p = .009). Notably, this effect was present for both central (p
= .006) and peripheral (p = .027) details. FTD patients in contrast, showed similar memory
for total, central and peripheral details, irrespective of the emotional content (all p values >
.05). Voxel-based morphometry analyses revealed that the degree of emotional enhancement
in AD was primarily associated with grey matter intensity in brain regions associated with
memory including the hippocampus, posterior cingulate and left temporal regions. In
contrast in FTD, emotional enhancement was associated with grey matter intensity in the
right amygdala, insula and orbitofrontal cortex. Emotion has an enhancing effect on
memory in AD, despite significant episodic memory impairment due to degeneration of
core memory structures including the hippocampus and posterior cingulate. Surprisingly,
the beneficial effect of emotion in AD occurs for both central and peripheral details. In
contrast, memory in FTD is not enhanced by emotion, despite intact subjective ratings of the
emotional content and understanding of events. Our results suggest that emotion does not
necessarily cause a trade-off in performance and further reveal that the integrity of medial
prefrontal emotion processing regions is integral to the preservation of emotional
enhancement of memory, rather than traditional memory network structures. These data
demonstrate the utility of studying dementia syndromes to improve our understanding of
the interaction between emotion and memory.
NEURAL RESPONSES TO THE MULTIPLE MEANINGS OF FEAR Paul Whalen,
Dartmouth College - Neural responses to fearful expressions can be interpreted as a response
to the lack of predictive clarity associated with these expressions, in addition to a response
to negative valence per se. This source ambiguity gives rise to numerous possible
interpretations of a fearful expression observed in another person. For example, from the
viewer's perspective, a fearful expression might mean that they themselves are in danger
(anxious interpretation). Alternatively, this expression could be a call for help (empathic
interpretation). Finally, the viewer may perceive that this expression is in response to their
dominance in this situation (dominant interpretation). I’ll describe behavioral and
neuroimaging data addressing these multiple meanings of fear.

19	  

	  

Session H

Poster Presentations: Session 2
Saturday, April 12, 2014
4:15 – 5:30 PM
See page 57 for abstracts

Session I

Perceiving Others’ Minds
Saturday, April 12, 2014
5:30 – 6:45 PM
Diana Tamir, Harvard University
Meghan Meyer, University of California Los Angeles
Alexander Genevsky, Stanford University
Thalia Wheatley, Dartmouth College

ABSTRACTS
NEURAL AND PSYCHOLOICAL REPRESENTATION OF MENTAL STATES Diana I.
Tamir, Mark A. Thornton, Harvard University; Juan Manuel Contreras, Walt Disney Corporation;
20	  

	  

Jason P. Mitchell, Harvard University - How do people understand the mental states of other
individuals? Psychological researchers have posited a number of specific sets of dimensions
along which people represent mental states, including agency and experience, emotion and
reason, mind and body, uniquely human and shared, social and nonsocial, valence and
arousal, or warmth and competence. Each of these models has offered considerable
behavioral explanatory power for the ways in which people think about others’ mental
states. But to what extent do any of these models capture the manner in which we actually
represents mental states? Research in social neuroscience has suggested that the neural
network which includes the medial prefrontal cortex, temporoparietal junction, and lateral
temporal lobes, plays a key role in our ability to think about the minds of other people, but it
is unknown how these regions represent such social information. The present study used
multivoxel pattern analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data to assess
whether any of these psychologically viable theories actually capture the representations of
mental states employed by our neural hardware. During fMRI scanning, on each trial
participants thought about one mental state by judging which of two scenarios would better
evoke that specific mental state in another person. Based on the patterns of activity evoked
for each of the mental states, we generated a neural similarity matrix between all mental
states within each voxel in the brain using a searchlight analysis. These neural similarity
matrices were then compared to similarity matrices derived, based on pretesting, from the
psychological models with the dimensions described above. This analysis revealed regions
of the brain that represented mental states according to each of the psychological models.
Results show that the models based on the valence and arousal, agency and experience,
emotion and reason, mind and body, and warmth and competence dimensions all robustly
captured the manner in which the brain represented mental states. In particular, regions
specifically within the social brain network, including the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex,
temporoparietal junction, and anterior temporal lobes represented mental states in line with
these psychological theories. Other models, such as the models based on uniquely human
and shared, and social and nonsocial dimensions failed to capture the way mental states
were encoded in any neural regions. These findings suggest that the way our brain encodes
others’ mental states converges well with extant psychological theories of mental state
representations.

SOCIAL WORKING MEMORY: 7 + OR – 2 IN THE MENTALIZING NETWORK?
Meghan L. Meyer and Matthew D. Lieberman, University of California Los Angeles - Whether
keeping track of three friends’ perspectives during a conversation, a roomful of colleagues
beliefs during a conference, or the political ideology of someone we just met, we constantly
juggle in mind social cognitive information or information about people’s mental states,
traits, and personalities. In psychology, managing information in mind is referred to as
working memory. From the perspective of brain function, how we manage social cognitive
information in working memory is mysterious. This is because the same neurocognitive
network, often referred to as the ‘mentalizing network,’ that increases during social
cognitive tasks without working memory demands is also known to decrease activation
during traditional working memory tasks. In fact, failure to decrease mentalizing network
activity during working memory tasks actually interferes with working memory task
performance. Thus, it is unclear if the mentalizing network has the functional properties to
support working memory for social cognition. Here, across three fMRI studies, we provide
the first evidence that the mentalizing network uniquely supports social working memory.
In Study 1, participants completed a social working memory task in which they ranked their
friends along trait dimensions (e.g., funny) during a delay period. Importantly, across trials
participants considered two, three, or four of their friends along the trait dimensions, which
allowed us to examine parametric changes in brain activation as a function of social working
memory load. Results showed that the mentalizing network linearly increased in activation
as a function of the number of friends considered during the delay period, a response
pattern characteristic of a working memory system. In another sample in Study 2, we
directly compared linear increases across this social working memory task and a cognitive
working memory task matched on performance (across trials, participants alphabetized two,
three, or four friends’ names during the delay period). Only the mentalizing network
differentiated the two tasks by linearly increasing as a function of the number of friends
21	  

	  

considered along trait dimensions during the delay period, while linearly decreasing as a
function of the number of friends’ names alphabetized during the delay period. To see if this
pattern extends beyond social cognitive processing for people we already know, in Study 3,
we used another social working memory paradigm in which participants first learned the
relationships between characters (e.g., siblings, enemies, friends). Then, during social
working memory trials participants considered how the characters would respond to events
based on their relationships with one another and during cognitive working memory trials
alphabetized characters names. Again, we observed linear increases in the mentalizing
network as a function of the number of characters’ reactions considered, but linear decreases
as a function of the number of characters’ names alphabetized. Thus, social working
memory relies, at least partially, on domain-specific processing in the mentalizing network.
Moreover, we are one step closer to understanding the functional properties of the
mentalizing network: for the first time we know it systematically, and uniquely, supports
social-cognitive processing load. Implications of these results and future directions for social
working memory research will be discussed.
AFFECTIVE AND NEURAL BASES OF THE IDENTIFIABLE VICTIM EFFECT Alexander
Genevsky, Stanford University; Daniel Vastfjall, Linkoping University; Paul Slovic, Decision
Research; Brian Knutson, Stanford University - The identifiable victim effect describes the fact
that people prefer to give to vivid identified victims than to anonymous victims of
misfortune. Affect has been thought to contribute to this effect, but research has not yet
established exactly which emotions matter and how. To further understand the role of affect
in the identifiable victim effect we first ran a behavioral study to establish the effect withinsubjects and identify affective correlates. We than ran an FMRI on 22 individuals to explore
the neural underpinnings of our observed behavioral effect. Prior to the study, subjects were
given a monetary endowment from which they could choose to donate on each trial of the
experiment (one of which would be randomly selected to count "for real"). During each trial
subjects sequentially saw either a photograph or silhouette of an African orphan, an amount
for the requested donation, and made a choice whether or not to donate. We found that just
viewing a photograph increased peoples’ willingness to donate (by about 50%). This
increase in giving was associated with and statistically mediated by self-reported ratings of
positive, rather than negative, arousal in response to the photographs. Further, in our
imaging study we found that although a number of neural regions were responsive to the
photograph vs. silhouette contrast, only the nucleus accumbens predicted eventual decisions
to give. Current behavioral and neural findings suggest that the identifiable victim effect
may be explained by positively aroused feelings and nucleus accumbens activation in
response to affectively evocative identifiable information. This activity may compel people
to give to others based on identifiable and affectively compelling characteristics, even in
spite of costs to themselves.
THE REPURPOSED MIND Thalia Wheatley, Dartmouth College - Human beings are unlike
other animals along two dimensions: innovation and sociality. We spend much of our lives
imagining what is possible, leading to the rapid evolution of design for products, policies
and art. We create vast and fluid social networks built on common interests and congregate
en masse, often with strangers. How did we get here? Where did this capacity for
innovation and connection come from? One theory is that the human brain re-purposes
ancient neural computations for new domains: hardware that originally evolved to map the
visible extended to map the invisible. I will present evidence from my own and other labs
that supports this view and discuss how re-purposing provides a useful framework for
understanding the structure, capacities, and limits of human thought and behavior.

22	  

	  

	  

	  

23	  

	  

Poster Session D
Friday, April 11, 2:35-3:50pm
D-01
THE EFFECTS OF CORTISOL ON EXPLICIT VERSUS
IMPLICIT PROCESSING OF SOCIAL THREAT: AN
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Jacobien van
Peer, Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Peter Putman, Institute
of Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands The stress hormone cortisol is important for the
regulation of social motivational processes. High cortisol
levels have been associated with social fear and
avoidance, which play an important role in social anxiety,
as does hypervigilant processing of social threat.
However, causal effects of cortisol on social threat
processing remain unclear. Previous studies have shown
both increases and decreases in social threat processing
after cortisol administration. A review of these studies
suggested that task or goal-relevance may be an
important factor modulating the effects of cortisol on the
processing of threat stimuli, consistent with the view,
based on animal studies, that corticosteroids generally
facilitate processing and adaptive behavior that is most
relevant to the situation. Hence, we hypothesized that
cortisol would increase threat processing when the
stimuli are task-relevant, and inhibit threat processing
when the stimuli are task irrelevant or distracting. In the
present study we tested this hypothesis by directly
comparing the effects of cortisol on task-relevant (explicit)
versus task-irrelevant (implicit) processing of the same
social affective stimuli. In an event-related potential (ERP)
study we investigated the effects of oral administration of
cortisol (40 mg hydrocortisone) on the processing of
angry, fearful, happy, and neutral facial expressions in 24
healthy participants using a double-blind, within-subject,
placebo-controlled design. Faces were presented at the
center of a computer-screen for 300 ms, flanked by a pair
of vertical lines (one on the left and one on the right side)
with either the same or a different length. Emotional
expression was varied across blocks, with angry, fearful,
and happy faces shown in separate blocks, randomly
intermixed with neutral faces (50% of trials). The
experiment consisted of two conditions: In the face
(emotion-relevant) condition, participants had to indicate
with a button press on each trial whether the face showed
an emotional or neutral expression, and ignore the lines.
In the line (emotion-irrelevant) condition, participants
had to indicate whether the two lines were of the same or
a different length, and ignore the faces. The order of the
conditions and the order of the blocks within each
condition were randomized for each participant. Previous
studies have shown similar tasks to be highly sensitive for
capturing the effects of attention on the processing of
emotional facial expressions. These studies demonstrated
that the initial rapid stage of emotional expression
processing (showing enhanced early positive potentials in
response to emotional compared to neutral faces) is
unaffected by attention, while later, more controlled
stages of expression processing (reflected by positive
potentials > 220 ms post-stimulus) are inhibited when

attention is directed away from the facial expressions (i.e.,
in the line condition). The results of the present study
show how the effects of cortisol on social threat
processing are modulated by these attention effects. These
results will be discussed in light of the importance of
motivational context (task-relevance) on the effects of
cortisol on threat processing.
D-02
SPEAKER-LISTENER PERSUASION: AN fNIRS
STUDY OF MESSAGE PROPAGATION Kristin
Shumaker, Matthew Brook O'Donnell, Nicolette Gregor, Emily
B. Falk, Communication Neuroscience Lab, University of
Pennsylvania - Successful message propagation depends
on both the intention of a speaker to spread a message
and their conception of how the message will be received
by others. Previous fMRI studies collected neural data
during an initial exposure to original content (i.e. pilot TV
shows, novel products, mobile game applications), along
with post-exposure ratings and video recommendations
of the content. However, the fMRI environment limits the
ability to capture neural activity in dynamic social
interactions.
By contrast, functional near-infrared
spectroscopy (fNIRS) allows recording of neural activity
in real time as participants complete tasks. With the
ability to record time-locked audio and video, fNIRS also
affords the potential to understand a wider range of
communication signals than can be captured in an MRI
environment. In this study, subjects (n=22) were asked to
watch either seed videos, or the video recommendations
recorded by other subjects, for 30 mobile game
applications,
while
their
neural
activity
was
simultaneously recorded using fNIRS. Each subject was
then subsequently video recorded discussing the ideas for
the benefit of future participants as fNIRS recording
continued. The initial seed videos were controlled for
enthusiasm (high vs. low) and valence (positive vs.
neutral vs. negative), allowing us to examine how such
features elicited neural activity in an initial group of
listeners, and how that neural activity then propagated
from the initial group to subsequent idea recipients, along
a chain formed by speaker-listener dyads. In other
words, each dyad is structured as part of a propagation
chain, such that the first-order subject in the chain
watches the original, controlled content of the seed videos
and the second-order subject watches the video
recommendation recorded by the first. Using past fMRI
research to define a priori regions of interest, we will
present data on neural "intention effects" (neural activity
associated with participants' initial intentions to share
information), "salesperson effects" (individual differences
in participants' success passing on their preferred ideas to
the next listener), and their interactions with preceding
message characteristics. Our analysis methods leverage
the correspondence between neural activity as
participants are exposed to ideas and then subsequently
deliver those ideas, as well as analysis of correspondence
in neural activity between speaker-listener dyads. Both
behavioral and fNIRS data from the propagation chains
will be reported, with a focus on how these results inform
our understanding of the psychology of successful
communication.
24	  

	  

D-03
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN THE
NUCLEUS
ACCUMBENS
AND
ACTION
OBSERVATION NETWORK CORRELATES WITH
ADIPOSITY Jeremy F. Huckins (a,b,*), Joshua S. Siegel (c),
Fran M. Miezin (c), Rebecca S. Coalson (c), Babatunde
Adeyemo(c), Todd F. Heatherton(a), Steven E. Petersen
(c,d,e,f,g,h), William M. Kelley (a,b); a Department of
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH, USA; b Program in Experimental and
Molecular Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth,
Hanover, NH, USA; c Department of Neurology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; d
Department of Radiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; e Department of Anatomy and
Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO, USA; f Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA; g Department of
Psychology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA; h
Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; * Corresponding
author - Obesity is a worldwide problem with outcomes
related to morbidity, mortality, health care costs and
impaired cognitive function. Body mass index (BMI) is a
commonly used metric but has many confounds.
Percentage body fat provides a more accurate estimate of
an individual's fitness. Obesity rates tend to cluster within
social groups suggesting a social or lifestyle factor.
Recently our lab and others have shown that viewing
reward cues or watching others receive rewards activates
regions of the action observation network (AON) in
addition to brain regions commonly associated with
reward (e.g., nucleus accumbens [NAcc]). Here we
examine whether resting-state functional connectivity
(rsfc) between NAcc and the AON predicts individual
differences in adiposity. Subjects (N = 260) participated
in rsfcMRI, anatomical MRI, and had their body fat
percentage measured via a bioelectrical impedance scale.
Individual NAcc seeds were automatically parcellated
from anatomical scans using FSL's FIRST. Functional
connectivity data was analyzed using a standard
processing stream (Power et al., 2013). NAcc seed maps
were created by correlating the mean time-series from the
individual seed region with each voxel. Maps were zscored and submitted to a regression analysis to identify
differences across adiposity. Connectivity between NAcc
and members of the action observation network were
positively correlated with adiposity. Specifically, inferior
parietal sulcus, inferior parietal lobule, posterior insula,
and mouth and hand somatosensory cortex connectivity
with NAcc was positively correlated with adiposity.
These results suggest a functional relationship between
reward-cue reactivity and action planning, the strength of
which may give rise to unhealthy eating habits.

D-04
EYETRACKING
AND
NEUROIMAGING
INVESTIGATIONS OF DIRECT FACE-TO-FACE
INTERACTIONS L.A. Harrison, California Institute of

Technology, Computation and Neural Systems; M.L. Spezio,
Scripps College, Psychology; J.M. Tyszka, California Institute
of Technology, Biology and Biological Engineering; J. Elison,
University of Minnesota, Psychology; R. Adolphs, California
Institute of Technology, Humanities and Social Sciences;
Biology.- Gaze is an important social communicative cue
in primates. Individuals with deficits in social interaction,
e.g. those with autism or amygdala damage, exhibit
disturbances in gaze processing. While a large literature
documents processing of faces and eye gaze, the vast
majority of stimuli used in these studies have a series of
shortcomings: they are pictures or videos, rather than
people in the flesh. Yet, as our own experience and the
growing literature on interactive social cognition argue,
pictures and real people are processed in quite different
ways, and ecological validity may significantly affect gaze
behavior and processing.
In two experiments, we
employed a face-to-face paradigm to explore how gaze
behavior and the neural processing of gaze are modulated
by the live presence of another person. In this face-to-face
paradigm, a participant directly interacts with a live actor;
this interaction is contrasted with interaction through a
video of the actor. In the first experiment, a headmounted eye-tracker allowed us to track a participant's
gaze while they sat directly across from an actor and
conducted a conversation. In this experiment, participants
(n=27, 11 female) conversed with the actor in both an inperson face-to-face condition and in a live-video
condition. In the former, both the actor and participant
could see each others' gaze; we hypothesized that this
would motivate the participant to socially modulate their
gaze. In the latter case, the actor could not monitor the
participant's gaze, which we therefore hypothesized
would not be socially modulated to the same extent as the
in-person gaze. These hypotheses were borne out in our
findings: participants showed significant mouth gaze in
the in-video compared to in-person condition (Chisquared (1,N=26) = 9.02, p<0.01). Following the finding
that gaze behavior is indeed influenced by the direct
presence of another person, we explored whether the
neural response to gaze changes as a function of the
presence of another person in a blocked design fMRI
experiment. In a Live condition, participants (n=15, all
male) monitored the gaze of a live actor sitting behind the
bore of the magnet. Audio instructions delivered to the
actor's headphones cued their gaze: actor conditions
consisted of direct gaze, averted gaze, or eyes closed. In
the Recorded condition, equivalent video recordings of
the Live condition were used. Networks of activation
revealed a set of partially distinct networks activated by
direct Live gaze compared to Recorded gaze. The
conditions were primarily differentiated by greater
prefrontal and attentional activity in the Live but not
Recorded condition. We demonstrate that gaze behavior
and the neural response elicited by live gaze were distinct
from those in response to video gaze. Thus, the presence
of a real person, rather than a representation of them,
appears to trigger distinct social processing. This face-toface approach will be important to understanding deficits
in populations with impaired gaze behavior, such as
individual with autism.

25	  

	  

D-05
SOCIAL SUPPORT AS A PREPARED SAFETY
STIMULUS: EXAMINING THE ROLE OF SOCIAL
SUPPORT IN FEAR EXTINCTION Hornstein, Erica
(UCLA); Eisenberger, Naomi (UCLA) - Research has
consistently demonstrated that social support is linked
with positive mental and physical health outcomes, but
the mechanism underlying this beneficial relationship is
not well understood. By combining social support
research with well-established models of fear learning, we
sought to examine whether social support figures act as
'prepared safety stimuli'--naturally signaling safety during
times of threat. To the extent that social support figures act
as prepared safety stimuli, they should both inhibit fear
learning and enhance fear extinction, consequently
reducing threat-related stress. In a previous study, we
used a classic 'retardation' fear conditioning paradigm to
demonstrate that social support reminders, in the form of
images of close others, interfered with fear learning such
that individuals less easily associated fear responding
with their close others. In the current study, we used a
classic 'summation' fear conditioning paradigm to
investigate whether these social support reminders would
help enhance the extinction of fear. In order to examine
this, we designed a summation fear conditioning
paradigm, in which we paired three neutral stimuli that
had already been associated with fear with three different
types of additional stimuli: social support stimuli (images
of social support figures), stranger stimuli (images of
strangers), and neutral stimuli (images of flowers). Hence,
each subject was first conditioned to associate fear with
three neutral images (a stool, a basket, and a clock), by
presenting these images paired with a painful electric
shock during a conditioning session, resulting in each
image inducing a fear response when presented (increased
galvanic skin response; GSR). Each of these now fearful
neutral images was then paired with an additional image,
a novel picture of either a social support figure, a stranger,
or a flower, for a summation session during which there
were four presentations of the paired images and no
shock. In order to test whether the additional image
affected the strength of the initial fear association, each
fearful neutral image was presented again on its own.
Results showed that while individuals showed equivalent
initial fear learning for the three neutral images, fearful
neutral images paired with the stranger or flower stimuli
during the summation session induced a fear response
when once again presented on their own, as measured by
significant differences in GSR, whereas fearful neutral
images paired with the social support stimuli during the
summation session did not induce any fear response when
once again presented on their own. These results show
that social support figures weaken associations between
fear and other stimuli, suggesting that social support
figures act as prepared safety stimuli-inhibiting fear
learning (as demonstrated in a previous study) and
enhancing fear extinction (as demonstrated in the current
study). By acting as prepared safety stimuli, social support
figures may consequently reduce threat-related stress,
offering insight into the links between social support and
well-being.

D-06
EFFECTS OF SOCIAL SUPPORT ON BRAIN
RESPONSES TO PAINFUL STIMULATION IN
ROMANTIC COUPLES Marina Lopez-Sola, University of
Colorado Boulder.; Luka Ruzic, University of Colorado
Boulder.; Jason T. Buhle, Columbia University.; Jacob M.
Parelman, University of Colorado Boulder.; Tor D. Wager,
University of Colorado Boulder- Social attachment and
romantic bonding are powerful reinforcers, associated
with approach behaviors, openness and exploration, and
increased wellbeing while reducing negative affect and
arousal. Social support can have important effects on
physical and emotional pain in real-life settings such as
during childbirth, where it has shown to significantly
reduce the duration of labor and the rates of labor-related
complications and to significantly improve mother-infant
bonding. However, the neural correlates of such distressalleviating effects during pain perception remain to be
elucidated. This fMRI study assesses the effects of social
support from the romantic partner on brain responses to
acute thermal pain in healthy women (N=30), using a
hand-holding paradigm. We compared pain-related
responses during runs in which female participants held
the hands of their romantic partner vs. runs in which they
held a pneumatic squeezable device. Receiving social
support from the romantic partner significantly reduced
pain-related intensity and, to a greater extent, pain
unpleasantness. Importantly, it also reduced anxiety
associated with the pain anticipation cue while increasing
perceived comfort during the pain experience.
Preliminary fMRI results show significant reduction of
acute pain responses during partner hand-holding in a
number
of
pain-processing
regions
including
somatosensory cortices, thalamus, insula/basal ganglia,
and regions of the medial frontal cortex and anterior
cingulate cortex. Overall, these results suggest that
receiving social support from the romantic partner in a
pain-related context exerts a protective effect both at the
subjective and neural levels.
D-07
COMMON BUT DISTINCT CORTICAL RESPONSE
TO SPONTANEOUS AND VOLUNTARY FACIAL
MIMICRY Li-Fen Chen, Chiu-Jung Huang, Yong-Sheng
Chen, Jen-Chuen Hsieh; Institute of Brain Science, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Integrated Brain
Research Unit, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Computer Science, National Chiao
Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan; - Introduction: The
ability of feeling what others feel is essential for social
interaction. Embodying emotion, a model of emotion
contagion, is proposed as a two-stage process, including
facial mimicry and facial feedback. The present study
aims at unraveling neural circuitry and its temporal
scenario of embodied emotion by combining facial muscle
recordings, magnetoencephalographic signals, and selfreport pleasantness rating. Materials and methods: Forty
subjects (mean age 25.4¬±4.3 years old; 22 males) were
recruited in the study. Each subject was instructed to
passively view or voluntarily imitate the displayed video
clips (2 min each) of smiling with different strengths (0%,
26	  

	  

50%, 100%) and to report his/her pleasantness level at the
end of each block (20 clips in each block). The
electromyography (EMG) of the bilateral zygomaticus
major
muscles
and
the
whole-brain
magnetoencephalography (MEG, Neuromag Vectorview
system) were simultaneously recoded when they were
exposed to smiling video clips. Spatiotemporal maps of
brain activity for the event-related alpha-band MEG data
were estimated using the beamforming method, followed
by a paired t-test (contrast between100% and 0%, p<0.005,
uncorrected; extended cluster size > 10) for each
condition. Pearson correlation analyses were further
employed to determine the relationships between
pleasantness rating, EMG responses, and estimated brain
activity within the clusters of interest in both conditions.
Results: Significant bilateral EMG activations and
elevated pleasantness levels were found in both viewing
and imitating conditions. Similar but distinct activation of
mirror neuron system (MNS), motor network and reward
system were shown in these two conditions. The activity
of the ventral premotor area was found only in the
viewing condition, but not in the imitating condition. The
activity of the pars triangularis (Brodmann area 45) and
operculam ((Brodmann area 44) of inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG) are positively correlated with EMG activity in the
viewing and imitating conditions, respectively. Moreover,
putamen was associated with biofeedback of automatic
facial mimicry whereas caudate associated with that of
the instructed (cognitively modulated) mimicry.
Conclusions: Our results demonstrated different neural
mechanisms underlying perceiving and imitating smiling
faces. The MNS (IFG) and the orbitofrontal cortex link
smile perception to motor simulation and emotion
generation in both observation and imitation, with
different temporal dynamics. These findings suggest that
embodiment of emotional processing is dynamic and
temporal properties of brain responses to emotional
stimuli should be cautioned. .
D-08
AUDIENCES ENHANCE THE EXPRESSION BUT NOT
EXPERIENCE OF EMOTION W. Craig Williams; Stanford
University - The presence of others alters individuals'
tendency to produce emotional facial expressions, but the
source of this effect remains unclear. This is partially due
to the contested relationship between expression and
experience, another key channel of emotion. Traditional
theoretical accounts consider expressions to be nearautomatic
'read-outs'
of
underlying
experience.
According to these models, socially-induced fluctuations
in expression should reflect actual changes in experience.
However, an alternative account treats expressions as
efforts to communicate emotional experience to social
others. This social communicative model suggests that
the presence of others should modulate individuals'
expression without altering their emotional experience.
Critically, this theory also suggests that socially-driven
changes in emotion expression should actually improve
communication, for instance by increasing observers'
accuracy about an individual's emotional state. The
present study examined whether the mere presence of a
close friend may indeed alter emotional expression

independent of experience. We additionally tested a core
tenet of the social communicative account: that sociallyenhanced expression facilitates the communication of
affect to others. Thirty-four pairs of close female friends
were randomly assigned to either solo or presence
conditions. Within dyads, each friend was also randomly
assigned to either the 'target' or 'observer' role. Upon
arrival at the lab, friend pairs were separated and
informed that they would each be participating in two
different studies. Targets completed two study phases in
which they viewed and rated their emotional reactions to
positive, neutral and negative images while their facial
expressivity was recorded using electromyography
(EMG). Meanwhile, observers monitored targets via
video feed and rated their (targets') emotional experience
using the same scale. Targets in both conditions
completed the first phase in ostensible isolation.
However, for the second phase only, targets in the
presence condition believed their friends could see them
(but crucially did not know that their reactions were
being monitored).
Targets in the solo condition
meanwhile continued to believe they were alone
throughout the second phase.
This manipulation
revealed the effects of targets' knowledge of their friends'
presence on 1) targets' experience ratings, 2) targets'
expressvity as measured by EMG, and 3) observers'
accuracy in rating targets' affect.
D-09
ALEXITHYMIA IS ASSOCIATED WITH BLUNTED
ANTERIOR CINGULATE RESPONSE TO SOCIAL
REJECTION:
IMPLICATIONS
FOR
DAILY
REJECTION
AFFECTIVE RESPONSES TO THE
ENVIRONMENT HELP US NAVIGATE OUR SOCIAL
WORLD David S. Chester, University of Kentucky; Richard
S. Pond, Jr., University of North Carolina - Wilmington; C.
Nathan DeWall, University of Kentucky - Alexithymia, the
inability to understand and identify affective states, is
associated with poor social functioning. However, it
remains unclear how alexithymia might influence
individuals' likelihood of social rejection and the neural
mechanism that might be involved. The dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex (dACC) is a likely candidate given its role
as an 'alarm system' that is attuned to social rejection.
Using fMRI and a 7-day diary study, we found that the
core feature of alexithymia, difficulty identifying affect,
predicted both greater daily social rejection and a blunted
dACC response to social rejection. Multilevel modeling
revealed that the effect of deficits in affect identification
on daily rejection was mediated and suppressed by dACC
activation to rejection. Our findings emphasize the role
that accurate affective understanding plays in
maintaining social connections and implicate the dACC as
a crucial mechanism in this process. The suppressing role
of the dACC suggests future directions for clinical
interventions on those with affective disorders.
D-10
RELATING
GRATITUDE
TO
SOCIAL
EVALUATIONS AND GENEROSITY Christina M.
Karns, Ph.D., Dept of Psychology, University of Oregon 27	  

	  

Prosocial emotions, such as gratitude, might be thought of
as a lens through which other events, experiences, and
actions are magnified or filtered. Our working model of
gratitude, similar to other views, posits that this
emotional state consists of multiple affective and
cognitive processing stages. First, a benefit is recognized
through a rewarding emotion and a cognitive
appreciation of the "gift." This is followed by a complex
social evaluation of whether a social agent is responsible
(a benefactor), the cost to the benefactor, the benefit to
self, the cost-benefit of accepting, and inference about the
intent of the benefactor (e.g., whether the gift is given
freely or with "strings attached"). The outcome of this
social evaluation could be gratitude, indebtedness,
entitlement, or if social agency is minimal, simply
appreciation of a "lucky break." An important outcome of
gratitude is the motivation to reciprocate, to return the
favor or deepen social ties to the benefactor. However,
gratitude can also manifest as a prosocial desire to "give
back" to others -- to be a benefactor or "pay it forward". To
inform our in-progress neuroimaging studies, in a series
of behavioral studies we examine the relationship of state
and trait gratitude to two specific components of our
working model, the evaluation of social agency, and the
prosocial motivation to give, critical characteristics that
may dissociate gratitude from related positive emotional
states (e.g. relief, happiness, satisfaction, pleasure).
D-11
SOCIAL EXCLUSION LEADS TO DECREASED RISK
TAKING Vita Droutman, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles; Feng Xue, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles; Stephen Read, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles - The role of insular cortex. This work examines
the effect of social exclusion on risky decision making and
explores neural components responsible for this effect. In
particular, it investigates the role of the insular cortex in
mediating between social deprivation and risk preference.
The insular cortex is known to be sensitive to deprivation,
including social deprivation. Numerous neuro-imaging
studies (Aziz et al, 2000; Masten et al 2009) have shown
elevated insular cortex activation during social exclusion.
However, the insula has only recently been identified as a
crucial component of the decision making circuitry.
Specifically, increased insula activation immediately prior
to decision making has been shown to be related to
decreased preference for risk and vice versa (Kuchen &
Knutson, 2005, Xue et al, 2010) We hypothesize that
increased insular cortex activation due to social exclusion
will be related to a preference for the safer choice. The
research consists of a behavioral study and an fMRI pilot
study.
133 university students participated in the
behavioral study. The CyberBall task was used to induce
social deprivation. In this task, participants start by
playing a ball tossing game with 2 other players. At the
end of the initial period, for Ss in the exclusion condition,
the 2 other players start throwing the ball to each other
only, thus excluding the participant. For participants in
the control group, the game continues without change
until the end. Following this social exclusion
manipulation, risky decision making was assessed with
the CUPS Task (a computer game in which participants

make a series of choices, each a selection of a gamble or a
safe choice, for financial reward). To induce a social
reward context, we told the participants that the final step
of the experiment is a game to be played individually or
with a group. In order to 'get into' the group game, they
have to reach a certain threshold in their winnings in the
CUPS task. We found that Ss in the exclusion condition
had significantly lower preference for the risky choice (M
= .5) than participants in the control group (M= .6), t (2,
133)=-3.14, p=.002. The fMRI pilot (11 participants)
utilized a within subjects design: each subject performed 2
sets of CyberBall (once in the exclusion and once in the
inclusion condition in counter-balanced order) followed
by the CUPS task for each set. It confirmed that social
exclusion incites insular cortex activation characteristic of
deprivation states. Participants of this study had
significantly higher activation in Anterior Insula and
Anterior Cingulate Cortex while evaluating gambles in
CUPS task immediately following Cyberball game played
in excluded condition as compared to CUPS task
following Cyberball inclusion condition. This research
analyzes the neural mechanisms underlying the impact of
social context on risky decision making and suggests that
insular cortex may mediate the effect of social exclusion
on decreased risk preference.
D-12
AUDIENCE IN RESONANCE: SHARED BRAIN
RESPONSES DURING LISTENING TO REAL-LIFE
SPEECHES Ralf Schmälzle - General and Biological
Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of
Konstanz, Germany; Frank Häcker - General and Biological
Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of
Konstanz, Germany; Christopher J. Honey - Department of
Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, USA; Uri
Hasson - Department of Psychology, Princeton University,
Princeton, USA; Harald T. Schupp - General and Biological
Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of
Konstanz, Germany - Powerful speeches have an enormous
ability to draw in their listeners. Here we measured fMRI
while participants listened to real-life speeches varying in
rhetoric quality and assessed the emerging coupling
between regional neural response profiles across listeners
via inter-subject correlation (ISC) analysis. As expected,
listening to real-life speeches evoked responses that were
strongly correlated across listeners in widespread
networks spanning across early auditory, linguistic
(including superior temporal gyrus, angular gyrus,
supramarginal gyrus, temporo-parietal junction, and the
inferior frontal gyrus), and extralinguistic regions
(including the precuneus, medial and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex). The main finding is that ISC effects
were stronger for engaging vs. unengaging speeches,
especially in bilateral superior temporal cortex. The
enhanced inter-subjective coupling between listeners
during engaging speeches suggests that they are more
optimally tuned in to the time-varying speech signals,
pointing to collectively increased attention, whereas
unengaging
speeches
are
processed
more
heterogeneously and attract less attention. These effects
bear resemblance to metaphors of resonance, which are
often invoked in discussions of speech impact and
28	  

	  

suggest ISC as a potential measure for quantifying a given
stimulus' power to attract collective attention. Taken
together, the present results contribute to the emerging
literature on auditory attention under natural
circumstances
and
offer
new
possibilities
for
interdisciplinary research on the neural mechanisms
mediating the reception of entertaining or persuasive
messages.
D-13
SOCIAL SOURCES OF RISK AND AMBIGUITY Kim
Fairley, Department of Economics, Radboud University
Nijmegen; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen; Alan Sanfey,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University Nijmegen ; Jana Vyrastekova, Department
of Economics, Radboud University Nijmegen; Utz Weitzel,
Department of Economics, Radboud University NijmegenRisk and ambiguity are respectively characterized by
having probabilistic information concerning your choice
options, or not. Studies on economic decision making
under uncertainty have mainly focused on people's
preferences' for risk and ambiguity in lottery setups. In
these lottery contexts it is often found that people are
ambiguity averse. They shy away from unknown
uncertainty (ambiguity), more so than for known
uncertainty (risk). Next to the distinction of the type of
uncertainty, our study also emphasizes the importance of
acknowledging the source of uncertainty. Real life cannot
often be captured by a lottery like the flip of a coin or the
roll of a die. People face uncertainty that directly stems
from the conscious choice of (an)other person(s). This can
be either anonymously in markets or more personal when
having to decide if you lend money to your friend. In
these situations, a person's outcome is dependent on
another person's behavior, instead of the draw of a
mechanistic lottery. In this study we investigate
preferences for uncertainty in a social context and
examine how these preferences differ compared to
preferences measured by a standard lottery setup. This
approach allows us to investigate if and by which
mechanisms preferences for uncertainty are affected by its
source. Twenty two adults participated in our fMRI
study. While lying in the MRI scanner they had to
indicate how many tokens (between 0-10) they wanted
transfer to either a computerized lottery device (nonsocial conditions) or to a human receiver (social
conditions). The transferred amount would then be
multiplied by 3, before participants could receive back
some proportion of their transferred amount. In the nonsocial case, this was randomly determined by the draw of
a marble from a lottery, while in the social case these were
the decisions of other participants who had decided in an
earlier behavioral session to either keep the full amount or
return back half of the tokens received. In both situations
participants made transfer decisions either when
probabilistic information was directly provided (risk), or
it was not (ambiguity). Our behavioral results show that
humans are ambiguity averse in both contexts. However
this aversion is highest in the social context than when
uncertainty stems from a lottery device. When comparing
neural mechanisms underlying ambiguity in a social

context to ambiguity in a non-social context we found
activation in the left and right fusiform gyrus, the right
inferior parietal lobule and the right superior medial
gyrus; areas that have been linked to interpretation of
social information. These results indicate that people's
preferences for uncertainty also depend on the underlying
source. Our neuroimaging results suggest that social
sources of uncertainty are characterized by emotional
arousal and human beings uncertainty in their ability to
mentalize and read other individuals intentions.
D-14
EXPERIMENTER
PRESENCE
EFFECTS
ON
SUSTAINED ATTENTION Wen Bu, University of Illinois
College of Law; Jenny Porter, Columbia University; Kevin
Ochsner, Columbia University - The accepted theory of
social facilitation states that the presence of other people
enhances "dominant" responses and inhibits "nondominant" responses and thus improves performance on
easy or well-learned tasks and worsens performance on
difficult or novel tasks. Some have suggested an
attentional component to social facilitation such that the
presence of others either narrows focus on the task or
diverts it away from the task. We examined the potential
attentional component of social facilitation by using two
versions of a visual go/no-go task and varying the
presence or absence of the experimenter in the room
where the participant did the tasks. Because performance
on go/no-go tasks has been associated with sustained
attention to the task, we expected that differences in task
speed and accuracy when the experimenter was present
or absent would reflect differences in sustained attention.
We found that experimenter presence slowed task
performance, particularly on the more difficult task. This
effect was particularly pronounced if the experimenter
was present during earlier, rather than later, sets,
suggesting that experimenter presence interferes with
sustained attention at the point (early in the experiment)
at which sustained attention would ordinarily be at its
peak. Our results suggest that at least the performance
decrement on difficult or novel tasks found in social
facilitation studies may be partly explained by diversion
of attention from the task at hand to the other person or
people in the room.
D-15
AN
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS
INVESTIGATION OF POLITICALLY-BASED SOCIAL
EXPECTANCY VIOLATIONS DURING IMPRESSION
FORMATION AND CATEGORIZATION Ivo Gyurovski
(University of Chicago); Matthew Schafer (College of William
and Mary); Cheryl Dickter (College of William and Mary);
Jasmin Cloutier (University of Chicago) - Social expectations
of individual or group behavior are an integral aspect of
person perception (Jones, 1990; Macrae & Bodenhausen,
2000; Olson, Roese, & Zanna, 1996 ). When a group
member displays stereotype-inconsistent behavior, the
resulting violations of perceivers' social expectation can
have many consequences. For example, they tend to
experience greater affective arousal (Jussim, Coleman, &
Lerch, 1987), form extreme evaluations of the targets
29	  

	  

(Bettencourt, Dill, Greathouse, Charlton, & Mulholland,
1997), and recruit additional cognitive operations to
process the violating information (e.g., Bartholow et al.,
2001; Stangor & McMillan,1992). Violations of social
expectation also increase the likelihood that perceivers
will individuate the target (Brewer, 1988; Fiske and
Neuberg, 1990; Macrae et al., 1999;). Previous research
examining the neural substrates of social expectancy
violations found that brain regions involved in
mentalizing (i.e., temporoparietal junction and medial
prefrontal cortex) are preferentially recruited when
perceiving targets violating social expectations (Cloutier
et al., 2011; Todorov & Mende-Siedlecki, In press). Past
research has also demonstrated that event-related
potential (ERP) components can serve as indicators of the
recruitment of processes responding to expectancy
violation in regard to race (Bartholow et al., 2001; Dickter
& Gyurovski; 2011;). The current study was designed to
test whether the N2 and the P3 components of the ERP in
response to the perception of targets paired with positions
that represent either expectancy confirmations or
violations of their political orientation, putatively
reflecting early changes in attention and working memory
updating respectively. Undergraduate participants read a
statement conveying either a political statement that was
typical of a Democrat or a Republican. They subsequently
viewed the face of a politician that was identified as either
a Democrat or a Republican, resulting in expectancy
confirming or violating trials. ERPs were locked to the
onset of each politician's image. Participants completed
either an impression formation task (N=23) in which they
were told to form an impression of each target, or a
categorization task (N=20) in which they had to indicate
whether the image was congruent or incongruent with the
political information conveyed.
Results revealed a
sentence by image interaction such that higher N2
amplitudes were observed in response to expectancy
confirming (e.g., Democrat Sentence - Democrat Image)
relative to expectancy violating trials (e.g., Democrat
Sentence - Republican Image). For the P3 component,
however, a significant sentence by image interaction
indicated that higher amplitudes were observed in
response to expectancy violating relative to expectancy
confirming trials. Furthermore, the data revealed a
significant task by image interaction, such that higher P3
amplitudes were observed in response to Republicans,
relative to Democrats during categorization, whereas no
differences were observed during impression formation.
These results provide a better understanding of the
impact that expectancy violations and confirmations have
on social cognition and help further our knowledge of the
neural correlates of person perception. In particular, these
findings arguably reflect differential effects of violating
and confirming information on working memory
updating and attention.
D-16
ONLINE
WORD-OF-MOUTH:
HOW
GROUP
RECOMMENDATIONS
INFLUENCE
NEURAL
PROCESSING
OF
SUBSEQUENT
RECOMMENDATIONS Christopher N. Cascio, University
of Pennsylvania ; Matthew Brook O’Donnell, University of

Pennsylvania; Joseph Bayer, University of Michigan ; Frank
Tinney, Jr., University of Michigan; Emily B. Falk, University
of Pennsylvania- Sharing ideas and information is an
essential aspect of communication and has substantial
impact on human preferences and behaviors. People
frequently make recommendations about products and
services, willingly sharing their experiences and opinions
with others. This phenomenon is particularly highlighted
in the new media environment, where people can
instantly share with a wide range of others online,
accounting for more than twice the sales of paid
advertisements. However, little is known about the neural
processes through which social information impacts
recommendations.
The present study seeks to
understand the neurocognitive processes underlying
what makes some people readily and dynamically update
their recommendations in the face of peer group feedback
when others do not. This study addresses the intersection
of social influence and social sharing in adolescents in a
task that involves recording recommendations of real
mobile game apps. We focus on adolescents given that
strong preferences and ways of processing social
information are learned during this developmental period
and adolescents have a high level of engagement with the
new media environment. We hypothesized that increased
activity in neural systems that help individuals track
social cues (i.e., the mentalizing system, the social pain
and reward systems) will be associated with changing
recommendations.
Sixty-five adolescent males were
recruited and completed two rounds of the App Rating
Task-a task that captures neural processes associated with
making recommendations on one's own and in response
to manipulated peer recommendations. During the initial
pre-scan rating session participants were asked to give
their preliminary opinions on 80 previously unknown
mobile game apps based on exposure to the game title,
logo, and brief description. During the fMRI session
participants were told that they would be re-rating the
same 80 mobile game apps. In the scanner, they were
shown manipulated information about whether their
peers in the study were more likely, less likely, or equally
likely to recommend the games to others, or for some
games, told that no peer recommendation information
was available. Increased activity in a priori hypothesized
mentalizing and social pain regions during peer feedback
tracked
susceptibility
to
social
influence
on
recommendations.
For example, activity in an
anatomically defined rTPJ ROI across all feedback
conditions predicted how often participants changed their
recommendation (r = .292, p = .019). This effect was
strongest when participants were told that peers were less
likely to recommend the app to others (r = .293, p = .018).
Parallel results were observed in affective processing
systems relevant to processing social cues. Overall, our
results demonstrate that increased activity in brain
systems associated with understanding the mental states
of others and maintaining social ties significantly
predicted changing recommendations in the face of group
feedback that peers were less likely to recommend the
app to others. These findings may help explain the power
of negative reviews in the new media environment, lend
insight into the psychological and neurocognitive
processes underlying recommendations, and speak to
30	  

	  

important basic psychological forces that help humans
share ideas and maintain group harmony.
D-17
ACTIVATION AND DEACTIVATION OF THE
SOCIAL BRAIN: A BRAINMAP META-ANALYSIS
Jennifer L. Robinson, Ph.D. & Jessica Busler; Auburn
University, Department of Psychology - Social cognition
plays an undeniable role in everyday behaviors.
Advances in functional neuroimaging have afforded the
scientific community an opportunity to understand the
neural correlates of such complex processes. However,
single studies can differ across a number of parameters,
thus limiting their potential to generate robust models of
neural network involvement. Here, we capitalize on the
structure of the BrainMap database to identify a wholebrain social cognition network encompassing over 58
studies and inclusive of 1,111 subjects. Activation
likelihood estimation results revealed 18 clusters
consistently activated by tasks that are taxonomically
considered 'social cognition' by the BrainMap ontology.
Clusters included portions of the inferior (BA9/BA44),
medial (BA9/BA10), and superior frontal gyri
(BA6/BA9), the anterior cingulate (BA32), superior
temporal gyri (BA 39), inferior parietal lobules (BA 40),
the insula, the posterior cingulate (BA31), the caudate, the
hippocampi (BA37), and the amygdalae. Additionally, we
sought to determine which brain regions were
deactivated during social cognition. To this end, we found
regions of deactivation in the right amygdala, anterior
cingulate (BA32), right medial frontal gyrus (BA10), and
portions of the parietal lobe. These data present a model
for future investigations of functional or effective
connectivity in social cognitive paradigms by providing
network nodes for consideration when analyzing singlestudy functional neuroimaging data. Doing so may
elucidate the neural mechanisms underlying social
cognitive phenomenon.
D-18
BEYOND THE LAB: PREDICTING DAILY SOCIAL
INTERACTION QUALITY FROM PERFORMANCE
ON EMOTION REGULATION AND EMPATHIC
ACCURACY TASKS Jenny Porter, Columbia University;
Jennifer Silvers, Columbia University; Erik C. Nook, Stanford
University; Jamil Zaki, Stanford University; Kevin Ochsner,
Columbia University - As thinking, feeling, humans we are
constantly appraising and reappraising emotional cues in
our environment. Furthermore, we often try to infer the
emotional appraisals of those around us. Both emotion
regulation and empathic accuracy are thought have
profound consequences for our personal and
interpersonal well-being. However, no prior work has
investigated the relationship between these skills. In a
novel study, 43 adult participants (23 female, M= 20.8,
SD= 2.72) completed an emotion reappraisal task (Silvers
et al., 2012) and an empathic accuracy task (Zaki et al.,
2008) in counterbalanced order. Preliminary findings
revealed no significant relationship between empathic
accuracy and emotion reappraisal; however, individuals
higher in empathic accuracy for negative experiences

reported feeling less negative after viewing aversive
images than those lower in empathic accuracy (t = -2.74, p
< 0.05). Here, we attempt to bridge the gap between labbased measures of emotional skills and real life social
interaction quality by presenting new findings on the
relationship between emotion regulation, empathic
accuracy (from our sample mentioned above) and daily
measures of social interaction quality collected from the
aforementioned sample during a 15-day daily diary
study.
D-19
PLACEBO
TREATMENT
REDUCES
SOCIAL
REJECTION-RELATED PAIN VIA ACTIVATION OF
THE DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND
THE PERIAQUEDUCTAL GRAY Leonie Koban,
University of Colorado Boulder; Ethan Kross, University of
Michigan; Choong-Wan Woo, University of Colorado Boulder;
Luka Ruzic, University of Colorado Boulder ; Tor Wager,
University of Colorado Boulder - Placebo analgesia (PA)
refers to a reduced experience of pain caused by belief in
a medical treatment. PA has been mainly studied in
somatic pain, but placebo effects may extend to social
'pain' and other forms of distress as well. Placebo effects
on somatic pain are thought to involve prefrontal cortex
and subcortical regions that contribute to the opioidergic
descending pain modulatory system, particularly the
periaqueductal
gray
(PAG).
The
corresponding
mechanisms of placebo effects on social pain are
unknown, but several recent studies suggest opioidergic
circuits in the PAG and forebrain may be involved. Here,
we used fMRI to investigate whether placebo treatment
can reduce the social 'pain' caused by re-experiencing a
recent romantic rejection. N=40 participants were
presented with pictures of their ex-partners and of friends
(control condition), during a baseline period, as well as
after a randomly assigned placebo or control intervention.
Behavioral ratings showed a significant reduction in
negative affect following the placebo but not the control
intervention, indicating that expectations can regulate
psychological pain. Further, a multilevel mediation
analysis revealed that placebo effects on social pain
ratings were mediated by increased fMRI activity in the
right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and PAG. These
findings imply that prefrontal-PAG interactions may also
be crucial for the relief of affective and social distress, and
suggest a possible mechanistic basis for non-specific
treatment effects in a wide range of affective disorders.
D-20
WATCH WHAT I DO, NOT WHAT I SAY I DO:
COMPUTER-BASED
"AVATARS"
TO
ASSESS
BEHAVIORAL INHIBITION, A VULNERABILITY
FACTOR FOR ANXIETY Catherine E. Myers(1,2), John
A. Kostek(1,2), Barbara Ekeh(3), Rosanna Sanchez(3), Annie
Krusznis(2), Noah Weinflash(2), Richard J. Servatius(1,2); 1.
VA New Jersey Health Care System, East Orange NJ; 2. Stress
and Motivated Behavior Institute, Department of Neurology
and Neurosciences, Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School,
Newark NJ; 3. Honors College, Rutgers University, Newark NJ
- Individual differences in personality can affect not only
31	  

	  

how we behave in daily social and non-social interactions,
but also determine vulnerability to various psychiatric
disorders such as anxiety disorders and post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). Various biological, genetic, and
psychological/cognitive risk factors have been identified,
including behavioral inhibition (BI), a temperamental
tendency to avoid or withdraw from novel situations. BI
is believed to be a relatively stable personality trait that is
evident from early childhood. Children and adults with
high BI are at increased risk for later development of
anxiety disorders and PTSD. BI can be assessed through
direct observation of behavior in children; in adults, the
assessment of BI is usually based on self-report, e.g.
questionnaires such as the Adult Measure of Behavioral
Inhibition (AMBI), which presents a series of behaviors
and attitudes that represent inhibited and non-inhibited
responses, and asks the degree to which each statement
accurately describes the respondent's typical behavior.
While such questionnaires are useful, they are subject to
all the limitations of self-report, including demand
characteristics and individual differences in selfawareness of one's own behaviors. As an alternative
method for assessing BI, we have developed a computerbased task, in which the participant creates and
manipulates an "avatar" through a series of scenarios, in
which the avatar can meet and interact socially with
different characters. At each choice point, the participant
is presented with three alternative actions that the avatar
can take; some of these are simply "distractor" questions
related to the scenario (e.g. a choice between several
possible food items for lunch) and some ask questions
specifically adapted from items on the AMBI (e.g. a choice
between approaching and interacting with a stranger vs.
keeping to oneself). Participants are requested to choose
the behavior that they themselves would be most likely to
make, if confronted with such a situation. Responses at
the choice points are scored similarly to the AMBI, with 2
points for each "inhibited" response, 0 points for the "noninhibited" response, and 1 point for a "neutral" response.
In preliminary work, we have collected data on the avatar
game from a sample of healthy young adults (n=57
college undergraduates), who were also administered the
AMBI, with task order counterbalanced across subjects.
In this initial sample, there was a very strong positive
correlation between BI as assessed by the avatar game
and by the AMBI self-report questionnaire (Pearson's
r>0.800, p<0.001). This suggests that the avatar format is
an effective way to assess BI in a healthy population.
Future work will examine this task in additional
populations, including those who express PTSD
symptoms, to determine whether this format may be a
more accurate way of assessing BI, and PTSD
vulnerability, than self-report questionnaire.

- Affective disorders impact many people and have high
societal costs; therefore treatments for these disorders
should be a research priority. Women are twice as likely
as men to receive a diagnosis of one of these disorders.
Although there is debate over the underlying factors
contributing to this disparity, substantial evidence
indicates that there is a biological component. Treatments
also show different efficacies between the sexes. For
example, drugs operating primarily through the
noradrenergic system often have better efficacy in men,
while drugs acting on the serotonergic system tend to
work better in woman. In addition, the non-traditional
treatment scopolamine, an anticholinergic with rapid
antidepressant action, has a stronger effect in women. As
we approach an era of personalized medicine,
understanding the biology underlying these sex
differences will be crucial for the effective treatment of
affective disorders. In the present study, we sought to
determine whether a common preclinical test of
antidepressant efficacy, the forced swim test, is sensitive
to sex differences, not only with traditional
antidepressants,
but
also
with
non-traditional
pharmacotherapies. To this end, we used the standard
forced swim test (two swim sessions in two consecutive
days) with male and female Sprague-Dawley rats
receiving three injections of desipramine (10 mg/kg, s.c.),
a tricyclic antidepressant that works mainly through the
noradrenergic system, scopolamine (20 ¬µg/mL or 8
¬µg/mL, i.p.), a non-selective muscarinic antagonist, or
vehicle, between the two sessions. An anti-depressant
effect on this test is typically defined as a decrease in
passive behaviors (floating) and an increase in active
behaviors (climbing and swimming) during the second
swim session. In addition, the active behaviors, climbing
and swimming, are believed to reflect noradrenergic and
serotonergic activity, respectively. Using this procedure
we found that desipramine increased climbing in both
male and female rats, consist with its modulation of the
noradrenergic system. While floating was decreased more
in males than females, this result did not reach
significance. The high dose of scopolamine (20 Œºg/kg)
caused a decrease in floating in female, but not male rats.
Together these results suggest that the forced swim test
appears to be sensitive to sex differences in both
traditional as well as non-traditional antidepressant
treatments. As this test is a widely used tool for the study
of antidepressant efficacy, establishing its utility in the
detection of sex differences further proves its usefulness
in preclinical research. It also suggests that the forced
swim task will be a valuable tool to further investigate the
physiology of sex differences as well as a first step in
tailoring drug interventions to the specific needs of
different patient populations.

D-21
SEX DIFFERENCES IN TRADITIONAL AND NONTRADITIONAL ANTIDEPRESSANTS IN RATS
Michelle Lerner, BS, Temple University; Yushi Kawasumi, BA,
Temple University Graduate Student; Brittany Wicks, BS,
Research Assistant, Temple University; Sabina Khantsis,
Undergraduate Research Assistant, Temple University; Debra
Bangasser, PhD, Principal Investigator, Temple University

D-22
TESTOSTERONE AND REDUCED PREFRONTAL
CONTROL
OF
EMOTIONAL
ACTIONS
IN
CRIMINAL PSYCHOPATHS Inge Volman (1,2), Katinka
von Borries (1,2,3,4), Erik Bulten (4), Robbert Jan Verkes
(2,3,4), Ivan Toni (2), Karin Roelofs (1,2); 1. Radboud
University Nijmegen, Behavioural Science Institute (BSI),
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 2. Radboud University Nijmegen,
32	  

	  

Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, The
Netherlands; 3. UMC Sint Radboud, Department of
Psychiatry, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 4. Pompestichting,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands - Psychopaths are known for
their well-controlled goal-directed behaviour. Yet, during
social challenges, they often show uncontrolled emotional
behaviour. Previous studies in healthy participants
showed that the anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC) is
crucial for successful control of social emotional
behaviour. Connectivity analyses, including dynamic
causal modelling, suggested that down-regulation of the
amygdala by the aPFC is critical in overriding automatic
emotional action-tendencies during control of emotional
behaviour, with testosterone modulating the strength of
the connectivity between the aPFC and amygdala. This
study tests whether alterations in this neuro-endocrine
mechanism underlie the paradoxical lack of emotional
control observed in psychopathic offenders. Control of
emotional behaviour was operationalised with an fMRIadapted approach-avoidance (AA) task requiring ruledriven control over rapid emotional responses. Fifteen
psychopathic offenders (no drugs, medication or
psychiatric comorbidity except antisocial personality
disorder; PCL-R > 26) and 19 matched healthy controls
made approaching and avoiding movements in response
to emotional faces. Control of social emotional behaviour
was required during affect-incongruent trials, when
participants had to override affect-congruent, automatic
action tendencies (approach-happy, avoid-angry) and
select the opposite response (approach-angry, avoidhappy). Psychopathic offenders showed less controlrelated aPFC activity and aPFC-amygdala coupling
during trials requiring control of social emotional actions,
when compared to healthy controls. This pattern was
particularly pronounced in psychopaths with high
endogenous testosterone levels. These findings suggest
that reduced prefrontal coordination underlies reduced
behavioural control in criminal psychopaths during
emotionally provoking situations. The modulatory role of
endogenous testosterone on the aPFC-amygdala circuit
provides a neurobiological mechanism of individual
differences, relevant for advancement of treatment and
reduction of recidivism.
D-23
THE EFFECTS OF LONG-TERM rTMS ON
NEURONAL PLASTICITY USING EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL IN PATIENTS WITH DEPRESSION
Kyung Mook Choi 1,2,3, Kyoung-Mi Jang 4, Kuk In Jang 3,
Myung-Sun Kim 4, Jeong-Ho Chae 1,2,3*; 1 Department of
Biomedical Science, 2 Department of Psychiatry, Seoul St.
Mary's Hospital, 3 Institute of Biomedical Industry, The
Catholic University of Korea, College of Medicine, Seoul, South
Korea, 4 Department of Psychology, Sungshin Women's
University, Seoul, South Korea - Previous studies have
reported that the repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS) could induce neuronal plasticity in the
brain. However, the effects of long-term rTMS on
neuronal plasticity are incompletely understood, and an
event-related potential (ERP) study on long-term rTMS in
patients with medication-resistant major depression has
been absent. Therefore, we hypothesized that long-term

rTMS treatment would induce changes in brain function
of patients with medication-resistant major depression
and the changes in brain function would correlate with
changes in rating scales. Eighteen patients with
medication-resistant major depression (five males and
thirteen females) participated in this study. Their mean
age was 34.9 years old (SD 14.5, range 19~67). Seventeen
patients participated in 3-weeks and 6-weeks follow-ups
and one patient could not participate in 6-weeks followup. All patients received rTMS treatment for three weeks.
All patients completed self-rated scales including
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D), Hamilton
Anxiety Scale (HAM-A), Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI), State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (SAI, TAI), KoreanRuminative Response Scale (K-RRS), Emotion Regulation
Questionnaire (ERQ), and Cognitive Emotion Regulation
Questionnaire
(CERQ),
and
electrophysiological
assessment such as ERP auditory oddball task, at their
first visit, 3-weeks, and 6-weeks visit. In rating scales,
there were main effects for time of measure in HAMD (F
= 7.83, p < .005), BDI (F = 13.17, p < .0001), HAMA (F =
10.1, p <. 0005), SAI (F = 4.96, p < .05), and 'blaming
others' scale of CERQ (F = 3.49, p < .05). In ERP auditory
oddball task, when amplitudes of FP1, FP2, FZ, FCZ, CZ,
and PZ channels were analyzed, P200 component showed
a main effect for time of measure (F = 4.28, p < .05).
Symptoms improved and ERP amplitude increased after
long-term rTMS treatment. The P200 amplitudes of the
channels were positively correlated with the reappraisal
scores of ERQ and the positive reappraisal scores of
CERQ when the changes between the baseline and 3weeks follow-up were analyzed (.581< r < .767, p < .05).
The results of this study suggest that long-term rTMS
treatment induces changes of brain function in patients
with medication-resistant major depression and the
changes of brain function were correlated with those of
reappraisal in them.
D-24
DEPRESSIVE SYMPTOMS AND EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS TO IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT
PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS
Stephanie Bastidas, Jacob T. Braunwalder, Nicholas M. Terry,
Lucy J. Troup; Colorado State University - Depressive
disorders have been associated with altered patterns of
emotion processing, reflected across all stages of
information processing. Event-related potential (ERP)
experiments have established distinct patterns of ERP
components' amplitude and latency, mostly a slowed and
reduced P3 component for happy stimuli and a slowed P3
component for negative stimuli. It is still unclear,
however, whether these differences occur independently
from intentionality during emotion processing; that is,
whether directing attention toward the emotional versus
non-emotional aspects of emotional stimuli affect ERPs to
these stimuli. The current study aimed to examine the
effect of implicit and explicit processing on the
relationship between depressive symptoms experienced
in the week prior and event-related brain potentials to
emotional facial expressions. Electroencephalogram was
recorded from 19 electrodes (10-20 International System)
while participants performed sex discrimination (implicit)
33	  

	  

and emotion discrimination (explicit) judgments of faces
showing happy, sad, and neutral expressions in fullyrandomized blocks. Explicit processing was associated
with greater mean P1 (80-140ms) and N170 (140-200ms)
amplitudes for sad and neutral than happy faces in
depressed but not in control individuals. These
differences were also reflected as greater P1 and N170
amplitude to happy faces in controls than in depressed
individuals. No effects of group or emotion were found
during implicit processing or for P3 and late positive
potential (LPP) latency and amplitude in either condition.
Results suggest depressive mood is associated with early
differences in processing of happy facial expressions
when attention is directed to emotional features of the
stimuli but not during incidental processing of facial
expression.
D-25
THE IMPACT OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX "WARM
UP" ON IMMEDIATE COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL
ABILITY
IN
OLDER
ADOLESCENTS
WITH
ELEVATED SYMPTOMS OF DEPRESSION Emma L.
Peterson, M.A. (University of Denver); Stephen R. Shirk,
Ph.D. (University of Denver) - Cognitive Reappraisal (CR)
is a central component of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
(CBT) for adolescent depression (Weersing, Rozenman, &
Gonzalez, 2009). Yet, previous work has failed to identify
the specific impact of CR training on symptom reduction.
Additional work also demonstrates that a brain region
highly associated with successful CR in adults, the
Prefrontal Cortex (PFC), is under-developed in
adolescents (Steinberg, 2005). It has been suggested that
CR capacity develops over the course of adolescence in
conjunction with the maturation of the PFC (Garnefski,
Boon, & Kraaij, 2003). Given evidence that adolescents
report using cognitive coping strategies, including CR,
less than adults (Garnefski, Legerstee, Kraaij, Van Den
Kommer, & Teerds, 2002) there has been growing concern
that CBT interventions directed at building CR abilities in
depressed teens might be constrained by PFC immaturity
(Shirk, 2010). Insofar as CR is useful for managing
negative emotion (Gross & John, 2003), finding a way to
improve CR ability in adolescents could improve
outcomes for adolescent depression and other disorders.
The primary aim of the current study is to incorporate
research findings from affective neuroscience literature
with treatment development research. Specifically, the
study, will evaluate the impact of PFC "warm up" on
immediate CR ability (which is defined as the successful
reduction of negative affect in the face of negative
stimuli). Pilot data from the initial phase of the study will
be presented. Participants include 8 older adolescents
(aged 18-19 years-old) with moderately elevated
symptoms of depression. First, participants watched a
sad film clip and complete self-report and behavioral
measures of mood to establish a baseline level of negative
affect. To obtain self-report measures of mood,
participants completed the Positive and Negative Affect
Scale (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). The
behavioral measure of mood, the Facial Emotional
Expression Stimuli Test (FEEST; Young et al., 2002),
required participants to view happy and sad facial

expressions morphed to express 25, 50, and 75% of the full
happy or sad expressions and indicate whether the facial
expression was positive or negative. Individuals with a
negative bias, which would be consistent with sad mood,
demonstrate higher recognition rates for negative faces
than positive ones. Next, participants completed a
modified Reading Span (Rspan) task designed and
previously used by Bomyea & Amir (2011). The Rpsan is
a working memory task, which has previously been
shown to activate the PFC and improve performance on
subsequent affect related tasks. Participants were then
given CR instructions (following Troy et al., 2010) before
watching a second sad film clip and completing mood
measures. Changes in negative affect (both mood and
behavioral measures) were compared between both film
clips. Results indicate that on average, sadness ratings
on the PANAS decreased by 0.8 (sd=2.0) and happiness
ratings increased by 1.1 (sd=2.4) following the working
memory task and CR instructions. On the FEEST, the
percent of positive stimuli identified increased by 2.8
(sd=8.5). This pilot data indicates that the working
memory task followed by CR instructions has, on
average, had the intended effect on participants' moods.
D-26
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY AS A PREDICTOR OF
SOCIAL ANHEDONIA IN YOUTH AT ULTRA HIGHRISK FOR PSYCHOSIS Andrea Pelletier-Baldelli and Vijay
A. Mittal; Department of Psychology and Neuroscience;
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA; - Social
anhedonia refers to a limited capacity to find interest or
pleasure in initiating and/or engaging in social
interactions. Social anhedonia is often present in youth at
clinical high-risk for psychosis (i.e. individuals who are
clinically identified as being at risk for developing a
formal psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia). This
population is referred to as ultra high risk (UHR) due to
the attenuated psychotic symptoms and deteriorating
occupational and social functioning they tend to
experience. Current clinical assessment allows for a
limited ability in identifying UHR individuals; therefore,
there is a need for developing further means of detecting
psychosis risk. In addition to increased levels of social
anhedonia, there is some evidence that abnormal brain
development may be a key feature for this UHR group.
Normal brain development involves a gradual increase in
myelination, allowing for heightened efficiency in white
matter tracts and overall brain circuitry.
Research
suggests that this myelination process can be deficient in
UHR individuals. One way to assess for myelination and
white matter integrity is by looking at fractional
anisotropy (FA) through diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
In brief, higher FA values correspond to higher fiber
integrity in white matter.
Based on the available
literature, both social anhedonia and abnormal
maturational processes in UHR individuals allow for a
potential opportunity to identify vulnerability markers of
risk for psychosis. The present study assessed 15 UHR
individuals (aged 16-21) at an initial time point using
diffusion tensor imaging to evaluate white matter
integrity in the uncinate fasciculus (a tract implicated in
schizophrenia and social behavior). These 15 UHR youth
were then assessed 12 months later for social anhedonia.
34	  

	  

This is the first study in UHR youth to utilize multiple
levels of analysis to determine whether uncinate integrity
can be a viable predictor of social anhedonia and risk for
psychosis. Controlling for age, uncinate FA values were
significantly predictive of social anhedonia 12 months
later (F=3.06, p=.004). Specifically, lower FA values
corresponded to increased anhedonia. Results show that
lower white matter integrity in the uncinate may be a
biomarker for social anhedoina in UHR youth and
provide an additional means of identifying risk for
psychosis. These findings are consistent with the larger
brain development literature, which highlights deficient
myelination as a feature of psychosis risk. Study results
also provide further insight into the developmental
trajectory of schizophrenia, suggesting a link between
fiber integrity in the uncinate fasciculus and social
functioning.

D-27
A
CEREBELLAR
ROLE
IN
ANXIETY
VULNERABILITY: INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY WITH EXECUTIVE
CONTROL NETWORKS Meghan D. Caulfield - Stress &
Motivated Behavior Institute Rutgers Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Newark, NJ. ; J. Devin McAuley - 1)
Stress & Motivated Behavior Institute Department of
Psychology, Michigan State University; David C. Zhu Department of Psychology, Michigan State University
Department of Radiology, Michigan State University; Richard
J. Servatius - Stress & Motivated Behavior InstituteBehavioral inhibition (BI) is a risk factor linked to the
development of anxiety disorders that is typified by
extreme withdrawal when facing novel social and
nonsocial challenges. Previous research has revealed that
individuals scoring high on measures of anxiety
vulnerability show faster acquisition of cerebellardependent learning tasks, such as eyeblink classical
conditioning. Here, we assess individual differences of
cerebellar reactivity to stimuli and connectivity with
executive control networks using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Twenty-six college students
(M = 20.7 years of age, 27% male) were separated into
high and low scoring groups based on responses on the
Adult Measure of Behavioural Inhibition (AMBI).
Participants were familiarized to 96 faces and scenes on
day one and then underwent fMRI on day two while
making 'old' vs. 'new' recognition judgments about
familiarized and novel faces and scenes. A 7-minute
resting state scan followed the task-based functional
imaging. For the resting state analysis, spherical seed
regions with radii of 6mm were placed at the left and
right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) for each
participant. Between-group t-tests showed significantly
stronger structural connections of the right cerebellum
Crus I with the right DLPFC for the high AMBI group
compared to the low AMBI group, (p<.005). The right
cerebellum Crus I region was then used as a region of
interest to extract percent signal change for each of the
stimulus categories (familiar face, familiar scene, novel

face, novel scene) for each participant. A 2 (face/scene) x
2 (familiar/novel) x 2 (high AMBI/low AMBI) mixed
measures ANOVA indicates a main effect of familiar
stimuli, p<.05, as well as a trend for increased reactivity of
the high AMBI group to novel stimuli, especially novel
faces. Combined, these findings suggest a promising role
for the cerebellum as a neural substrate underlying risk
for anxiety. Supported by the SMBI, GSBS Foundation of
Research Scholars, and Michigan State University
Psychology.
D-28
BOLD ACTIVITY IN RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL
DOMINANCE RELATED TO A MEASURE OF
PSYCHOPATHY IN HEALTHY CONTROLS Matthew
Jerram, Ph.D., Suffolk University; Alyson Negreira, M.A.,
Suffolk University; David Gansler, Ph.D., Suffolk University Emotion is a dimensional construct, comprised of valence,
arousal, and dominance.
Emotional dominance is
understood as the sense of agency one has in response to
an emotional stimulus- the best exemplar is the contrast of
anger (high dominance) and fear (low dominance). In
terms of understanding psychopathy, an understanding
of emotional dominance is necessary as abnormally high
levels of emotional dominance are a likely correlate of
psychopathic behavior. The most widely used model of
psychopathy postulates that psychopathic behavior is
either a function of primary psychopathy, characterized
by callousness and instrumental aggression, or secondary
psychopathy, characterized by emotion dysregulation and
impulsivity.
While most neuroimaging studies of
emotion have primarily studied the neural correlates of
valence and arousal, recent work in our lab has
demonstrated regions associated with the processing of
emotional dominance. These areas include the insula,
visual association cortex, premotor area, and fusiform
gyrus for high levels of perceived dominance and the
precuneus for low levels of perceived dominance. In the
current study, it was hypothesized that brain activity in a
high perceived dominance condition would be positively
correlated with a measure of primary psychopathy.
Seventeen male participants viewed images from the
International Affective Picture System (IAPS); two
conditions were created using IAPS normative ratings:
high emotional dominance and low emotional dominance
(both with low valence). Participants passively viewed
the stimuli in a block design while undergoing functional
MRI. fMRI data were analyzed using the standard SPM8
processing stream and contrasts for high>low dominance
and low>high dominance were created. Analysis of these
contrasts identified clusters of significant activity in the
regions mentioned above. Participants also completed
several self-report measures outside the scanner,
including the Self-Report Psychopathy Scale (SRPS). The
SRPS provides two scales - a primary psychopathy scale
(PPS) and secondary psychopathy scale (SPS). Signal
change values were extracted from significant clusters of
the high>low and low>high contrasts using the Rex
toolbox and these values were correlated with PPS and
SPS scores. As expected, PPS correlated moderately to
strongly with activity in the left insula (L Ins: r = 0.58),
while SPS scores were weakly correlated (L Ins: r =0.08).
35	  

	  

This pattern was also present in right insula, the premotor
cortex, and visual association cortex, though the
correlations were weaker, but was not observed in the
fusiform gyrus. Of interest, the precuneus, which was the
only active region for the low>high contrast, correlated
moderately with both the PPS (r = -0.39) and SPS (r = 0.25). The results indicate that emotional dominance
plays a role in the normal variance of psychopathic traits
in the population and is relevant to understanding the
neural correlates of psychopathy

D-29
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER, BUT NOT
AMYGDALA
LESIONS,
IMPAIRS
SOCIAL
ATTENTION IN VISUAL SEARCH Shuo Wang1, Juan
Xu2, Qi Zhao2, and Ralph Adolphs1,3; Computation and
Neural Systems, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
CA, USA ; Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore.;
Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA; - People with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) have pervasive impairments in
social interactions, a diagnostic component that may have
its roots in atypical social motivation and attention
(Chevallier et al. 2012). Although there is evidence for
global dysfunction in autism at the level of the whole
brain, several studies emphasize abnormalities in the
amygdala. To further characterize the impairment of
people with autism in processing socially relevant
information and to elucidate the possible role of the
amygdala, we employed a visual search task with both
social (faces and people with different postures, emotions,
ages, and genders) and non-social targets (e.g.,
electronics, food, utensils), which participants were asked
to find in an array of 24 objects. We defined targetrelevant effects as the difference in the percentage of
fixations that fell on target-congruent versus targetincongruent objects in the array. In Experiment 1, we
tested 10 high-functioning autism subjects, 3 patients with
focal bilateral amygdala lesions, and 19 controls. Controls
rapidly oriented to target-congruent objects and showed a
strong and sustained preference for fixating them.
Strikingly, people with autism oriented significantly more
slowly to target-congruent objects, an effect driven
primarily by reduced orientation towards social objects.
By contrast, patients with amygdala lesions performed
indistinguishably from controls. In Experiment 2, we
recruited a different sample of 16 people with autism and
8 autism-matched controls, and tested them on the same
search arrays but all stimuli equated for low-level saliency
(Itti-Koch saliency, size, distance to center). The results
replicated Experiment 1 and we still found impaired
target-relevant effect in the autism group. In Experiment
3, we recruited 17 people with autism, 8 autism-matched
controls, 3 amygdala lesion patients and another group of
11 controls and tested them on a simpler array with only

12 array objects. We did not observe reduced target
relevant effect in autism anymore and all four subject
groups showed similar target-relevant effects. These
findings argue that the attentional deficit in autism is
specific to social stimuli, cannot be explained by low-level
visual properties of the stimuli, and only emerges with
high task demands. Furthermore, this deficit appears to
be independent of the amygdala. Supported by grants
from NSF, the Pfeiffer Family Foundation, the Simons
Foundation, and NIMH Conte Center, and Singapore
MoE AcRF Tier 1.

D-30
ANXIETY VULNERABLE INDIVIDUALS EXHIBIT
ENHANCED ACQUISITION OF CONDITIONED
EYEBLINKS:
SUPPORT FOR A LEARNING
DIATHESIS MODEL OF ANXIETY DISORDERS Todd
Allen, University of Northern Colorado; Stress and Motivated
Behavior Institute; Jacqueline Holloway, Stress and Motivated
Behavior Institute; Catherine E. Myers, Stress and Motivated
Behavior Institute, Dept. of Veterans Affairs, New Jersey Hlth.
Care Syst.; Richard J. Servatius, Stress and Motivated Behavior
Institute, Dept. of Veterans Affairs, New Jersey Hlth. Care
Syst.- The manner in which individuals acquire predictive
relationships and express avoidance may represent a
diathesis for anxiety disorders like post traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). We tested this theory with individuals
self-reporting behavioral inhibition (BI), which has been
proposed as a risk factor for the development of anxiety
disorders (Fincham et al. 2008; Hirshfeld et al. 1992;
Kashdan et al. 2009). Two hundred and twenty nine
undergraduates completed the Adult and Retrospective
Measures of Behavioural Inhibition (AMBI and RMBI,
Gladstone & Parker, 2005) and received 3 US alone trials,
60 acquisition trials, and 20 CS-alone extinction trials
presented in one session. Conditioning stimuli were a 500
ms tone conditioned stimulus (CS) and a 50-ms air puff
unconditional stimulus (US). Participants were randomly
assigned to receive delay, omission, or yoked training.
Delay training consisted of paired presentations of a CS
tone and co-terminating US air puff. Omission training
included the imposition of an omission contingency in
which the presence of a conditioned response (CR) during
the CS prevented US delivery. Yoked training consisted
of an identical schedule of CS and US delivery as the
group with the omission contingency, but CR presence
did not affect US delivery. For yoked training, subjects
were matched on total AMBI and RMBI scores to a
corresponding omission subject.
There were no
differences in UR amplitude between the high and low BI
groups.
Anxiety vulnerable individuals exhibited
facilitated acquisition as compared to non-vulnerable
individuals. This facilitation was greatest in the omission
and yoked condition.
There were no significant
differences in extinction between the three groups.
Comparisons of omission and yoked individuals did not
reveal avoidance learning but were consistent with a
partial reinforcement effect. We then tested the effects of
explicitly partial reinforcement schedules in which half of
36	  

	  

the acquisition trials were CS-US paired trials and half of
the trials were either CS alone or US alone trials. Anxiety
vulnerable individuals exhibited facilitated acquisition as
compared to non-vulnerable individuals in both partial
reinforcement protocols. CS alone partial reinforcement
produced a partial reinforcement extinction effect (i.e.,
PREE) but only in the anxiety vulnerable individuals. To
test the possibility of the partial reinforcement effects
being due to the increased time between paired CS-US
trials, we inter-mixed blank trials with no stimuli between
the CS-US paired trials is the same trail pattern as the
partial reinforcement schedules.
Only high AMBI
individuals exhibited facilitated learning to the spaced
trials with a variable inter-trial interval ranging from 25 to
123 s. Overall, enhanced sensitivity to forming stimulus
associations in anxiety vulnerable individuals is most
evident when the predictive relationship between the CS
and US is less than optimal such as in the case of
omission/yoked and partial reinforcement schedules.
Also, classic learning phenomena like PREE and the
spacing effect were only evident in anxiety vulnerable
individuals. These findings support a learning diathesis
model for anxiety disorders in which anxiety vulnerable
individuals learn associations more rapidly especially
when there is some uncertainty about trial type and trial
timing.
D-31
NEUROIMAGING
STUDIES
OF
NICOTINE
ADDICTION AND APPROACH BEHAVIORS Vlad B.
Papa, Kevin E. Ruprecht, Laura E. Martin; University of
Kansas Medical Center - Tobacco use is one of the top
preventable causes of death in the United States, with
about 20 percent of the US population currently smoking.
Previous studies demonstrate that smokers are more
impulsive compared to nonsmokers. Impulsivity is a
multidimensional personality characteristic associated
with increased reward sensitivity and increased approach
behaviors. One way to look at approach behaviors is
through the Behavioral Activation Scales (BAS) fun
seeking sub-scale, because fun seeking measures
spontaneous approach of potential rewards, and a desire
for new rewards (Carver and White 1998). The current
study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
to examine associations between approach behaviors and
the neural systems of reward during passive viewing of
smoking images. Participants (n=28) were scanned while
viewing images of smoking and nonsmoking cues, at least
4 hours following their last cigarette. Brain data was
correlated with approach behaviors measured by the
Behavioral Activation Scales (BAS; Carver and White,
1998). The medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), bilateral
insula and lateral PFC showed increased activation to
smoking images as BAS Fun-Seeking scores decreased. A
possible explanation for this may be that as the inclination
to seek out new rewards is increasing, the response to
smoking images is decreasing because the images are not
rewarding enough. Overall, these results provide more
insight as to the motivations people have for smoking,
and may have implications for the development of future
health interventions. For example, some smoking
cessation programs encourage individuals to engage in

rewarding activities that are incompatible with smoking.
However, if other activities do not provide a reward to
some smokers, these types of programs may be less
effective than others, such as pharmacotherapy. But by
determining the fun seeking levels of smokers attempting
to quit, smoking cessation programs can be tailor made
for each individual.

D-32
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN COPING STRATEGIES
AND ANXIETY: NEURAL MECHANISMS OF
EMOTION REGULATION Hannah C. Bianco , Pilyoung
Kim; Gary Evans; L. Phan; I. Liberzon; J. Swain; University of
Denver; Cornell University; University of Illinois at Chicago;
University of Michigan - Introduction: A major component
of cognitive-behavioral therapy interventions aimed at the
treatment of anxiety is the acquisition and use of adaptive
coping strategies. While adaptive coping strategies, such
as active coping, are consistently related to reductions in
anxiety, maladaptive coping strategies, such as behavioral
disengagement, are related to increases in anxiety. Active
coping involves effortful attempts to change a situation or
remove a stressor by taking direct action to address the
problem. Behavioral disengagement is characterized by a
decrease in effort or even a giving up of attempts to
change a problematic situation. Both of these coping
strategies reflect cognitive engagement with or
disengagement from the stressor or situation. However,
little is known about the neural mechanisms involved in
such differential coping strategies. The ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) are involved in cognitive down regulation of
negative emotions and in turn may underlie behavioral
coping strategies. Using neuroimaging and self-report
data, the current study examines the associations between
use of adaptive (i.e. active coping) and maladaptive (i.e.
behavioral disengagement) coping strategies, neural
functioning involved in emotion regulation, and trait
anxiety in young adults. Methods: Self-report of trait
anxiety (State-Trait Anxiety Inventory; Spielberger,
Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983) and use of
coping strategies (COPE inventory; Carver, Scheier, &
Weintraub, 1989) as well as neuroimaging data were
collected from a total of 48 participants (22 female, age M
= 23.60, SD = 1.32). fMRI scanning took place in a 3.0
Tesla Philips magnet scanner. Neural activity was
recorded while participants engaged in an emotion
regulation fMRI paradigm. During the Reappraisal
condition, participants effortfully decreased the intensity
of their negative affect in response to aversive images by
using the cognitive strategy of reappraisal. During the
Maintain condition participants naturally experienced
their emotional state in reaction to aversive images. The
contrast of Reappraisal and Maintain conditions was used
to represent neural functioning while engaging in
emotion regulation. Results: In the behavioral analyses,
the use of active coping was significantly correlated with
lower anxiety, r(46) = -.336, p = .019 and the use of
37	  

	  

behavioral disengagement coping was significantly
correlated with higher anxiety, r(46) = 458, p = .01. In the
fMRI analyses, active coping was associated with activity
in the left medial PFC/ACC, p < .005, uncorrected, voxel
> 20. Behavioral disengagement coping was negatively
associated with activity in the dorsal ACC and bilateral
ventrolateral PFC/inferior frontal gyrus, p < .005,
uncorrected, voxel > 20. Conclusions: The results suggest
that activity of the PFC and ACC during emotion
regulation is associated with more use of adaptive coping
strategies and less use of maladaptive coping strategies
for regulating anxiety. The understanding of such neural
mechanisms may help to inform future practice by
identifying individuals who may benefit most from
psychotherapeutic interventions aimed at enhancing
coping ability to reduce anxiety.
D-33
CORTICAL AND SUBCORTICAL CONTRIBUTIONS
TO DECODING EMOTIONAL SIGNALS: EVIDENCE
FROM
CORTICOBASAL
SYNDROME
AND
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE Fiona Kumfor (1,2,3), LaurieAnne Sapey-Triomphe (1), Cristian Leyton (1,2,3), John R.
Hodges (1,2,3) & Olivier Piguet (1,2,3); 1 Neuroscience
Research Australia, Sydney, Australia; 2 School of Medical
Sciences, the University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia; 3 ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its
Disorders, the University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia - Background: The ability to decipher cues from
static and dynamic facial expressions requires a complex
set of skills including basic visuoperception, face
perception, emotion detection and evaluation of higherlevel social cues. Although functional imaging will
identify the regions that activate during a given task, it
cannot determine which of these regions are necessary for
its successful completion. Clinical investigations, in
contrast, provide a complementary model within which
to study the neurobiological substrates of complex human
behaviours. Corticobasal syndrome (CBS) is an atypical
Parkinsonian presentation characterised by changes in
motor functioning, cognition and behaviour. CBS is
associated with changes in a network of brain regions,
such as the frontoparietal cortices and the basal ganglia,
regions which are posited to be involved in emotional
functioning. Anecdotal evidence indicates the presence of
emotional processing disturbance in CBS. Emotional
functioning, however, has not been comprehensively
studied in this syndrome to date. The aims of this study
were twofold: first, to establish the pattern and severity of
emotion processing disturbance in CBS, and second, to
determine the role of cortical and subcortical regions in
face and emotion processing by comparing CBS with
Alzheimer's disease, a dementia in which the medial
temporal lobes and posterior cingulate are the earliest
regions affected, and changes in emotional functioning
are relatively mild. Methods: Sixteen CBS, 18 Alzheimer's
disease and 22 controls were assessed on a comprehensive
battery of in-house face and emotion processing tasks, the
Ekman 60, and the Awareness of Social Inference Test
(TASIT). All participants underwent high-resolution
structural brain magnetic resonance imaging. Results:
CBS patients were impaired on tasks of basic facial

perception and higher-level emotion processing.
Importantly, performance remained impaired even after
covarying for their face perception deficits. In contrast,
the Alzheimer's disease group showed only mild
impairments on the higher-level emotion processing tasks
(Ekman 60, TASIT). Neuroimaging analyses using
Freesurfer revealed that cortical thinning in the occipital
lobe, fusiform face area and ventral visual stream was
associated with basic face processing, whereas
performance on emotion processing tasks was associated
with cortical thinning in the anterior cingulate, insula and
superior frontal cortex in all patients combined.
Correlations between behavioural performance and
subcortical volumes revealed distinct associations
according to patient group. Impaired performance was
associated with volume loss in the basal ganglia in CBS,
whereas hippocampal, amygdala and nucleus accumbens
atrophy was implicated in Alzheimer's disease.
Conclusions: These results are the first to demonstrate
widespread deficits in emotion processing in CBS, which
are related to neuronal atrophy in cortical and subcortical
regions involved in emotion decoding and emotional
responding. The results provide a potential mechanism
for the evolution of the psychiatric and behavioural
symptoms reported in this syndrome. Importantly, these
results also offer new insights into the network of cortical
and subcortical regions involved in the complex ability of
decoding emotional expressions.
D-34
NEURAL INDICATORS OF INCREASED EMPATHIC
CONCERN IN ANTISOCIAL INDIVIDUALS Nathan L.
Arbuckle, University of Ontario Institute of Technology;
Matthew S. Shane, University of Ontario Institute of
Technology - Antisociality implies a reduced concern for
others - and indeed, reduced empathy has been
consistently linked to increased antisociality. For example,
antisocial individuals, such as those high in psychopathic
traits, violent offenders, and parents who abuse children,
are characterized by limited empathic concern. This
limited empathic concern has been reflected in the
differential neural reactivity of antisocial individuals to
images of others in pain. That is, there is a general
tendency for people to display increased activity in the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and insula when viewing
others in pain, but antisocial individuals fail to
demonstrate this pattern of responding. Limited empathy
for others could be due to either a lack of ability to care
about others, or a lack of motivation to do so. In two
studies, we examined whether antisocial individuals
possess the emotional capabilities to allow for an
empathic response. This was done using a directed
emotion regulation paradigm, asking antisocial
participants to modify their reactions to images of others
in pain. All participants were recruited through New
Mexico probation/parole. We found that although these
participants showed little neural activity to images of
others in pain during passive viewing, they showed
increased neural activity in the ACC and insula to images
of others in pain when they were directed to increase their
concern for the person in pain. Further, the most severely
antisocial individuals, those high in psychopathic traits,
38	  

	  

were just as likely to show increased neural activity as
those low in psychopathic traits. Together, these studies
suggest that antisocial individuals are capable of
controlling their empathic responses, and raise the
question of why they fail to display empathy under
normal circumstances.
D-35
TESTOSTERONE ADMINISTRATION ALLEVIATES
SUBMISSIVE GAZE AVOIDANCE IN SOCIAL
ANXIETY Dorien Enter, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Leiden University; David Terburg, Utrecht University,
University of Cape Town; Anita Harrewijn, Leiden University;
Philip Spinhoven, Leiden University; Karin Roelofs, Radboud
University Nijmegen, Donders Centre for Cognitive
NeuroImaging- I	   Social anxiety may be based on a
ubiquitous social hierarchy system, with patients showing
an extreme form of social submissive behavior. Social
anxiety disorder is associated with reduced endogenous
testosterone levels and typical submissive behavior such
as gaze avoidance in social encounters. Administration of
testosterone has dominance-enhancing and socialanxiolytic effects, and has shown to enhance social
dominant gaze behavior in healthy participants. Because
avoidance behavior is the major maintaining factor in
social anxiety disorder, it is relevant to test whether
administration of testosterone can alleviate gaze
avoidance from angry faces. In a double-blind, withinsubject design, medication-free high socially anxious and
healthy control participants received a single dose of
0.5mg testosterone and a matched placebo, at two
separate days. On both days, their gaze behavior was
recorded while they looked at angry, happy, and neutral
facial expressions. In high socially anxious subjects
testosterone reduced submissive gaze avoidance as
indicated by an increase in first fixations to the eye region
of angry faces. In contrast, in healthy controls testosterone
diminished first fixations to the eye-region in a nonemotion-specific manner. These results suggest that
although testosterone generally decreases social behavior
in healthy participants, it promotes dominant gaze
behavior, i.e. eye-contact with angry faces, in high socially
anxious individuals. The findings support previous
notions that the effects of testosterone on dominance
seeking behavior are context dependent and may have
implications for treatment studies aiming to boost therapy
efficacy in social anxiety disorder.
D-36
DECREASED RESPONSE IN EMOTION AND
EXECUTIVE
NETWORKS
IN
ADOLESCENTS
SUFFERING FROM EMOTIONAL, ATTENTIONAL,
AND BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS Andrea T. Shafer 1,
Anthony Singhal 1,2, Vivian Chan 2, Jessica Van Vliet 3,
Sunita Vohra 4, Lihong Wang 5, & Florin Dolcos 2,6; 1 Centre
for Neuroscience, University of Alberta; 2 Department of
Psychology, University of Alberta; 3 Department of
Educational Psychology, University of Alberta; 4 Department
of Pediatrics, University of Alberta; 5 Department of
Psychiatry, Duke University; 6 Department of Psychology,
Neuroscience Program, and Beckman Institute, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign - Understanding alterations in

emotion-cognition
interactions
associated
with
psychopathology in youth is of paramount importance, as
psychopathologies with a childhood onset are associated
with a high incidence of relapse and heightened resistance
to therapy, along with other long-term health problems.
Emotion processing (EP) and attentional control (AC) are
sub-served by two separate, but integrated neural
networks, with EP being associated with more ventral
structures (e.g. amygdala-AMY, ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex-vlPFC) and AC with more dorsal structures (e.g.
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex-dlPFC, lateral parietal
cortex-LPC). Notably, AC is involved in both goalrelevant processing and inhibition of emotional
distraction. While EP and AC have been investigated
separately in healthy youth and clinical adults, little is
known about EP and AC in clinical youth suffering from
emotional, attentional, and behavioral disorders.
Abundant behavioral evidence points to problems in this
population with emotion regulation and attentional
impulsivity, but the neural correlates underlying these
maladaptive alterations in EP and AC remain unclear.
The present study investigated this issue in a group of 35
clinical adolescents (CA group) and a group of 18 healthy
controls (HC group), using an emotional oddball task
with infrequent task-irrelevant distracters [negative
(fearful and sad), neutral images] and task-relevant
targets presented amongst frequent phase-scrambled
images, while fMRI data were recorded. Importantly, this
task allows for the assessment of emotion processing,
goal-oriented/attentional control processing, and the
interaction between them. Preliminary analysis of
behavioral and brain imaging showed altered emotion
and executive functioning in the CA compared to the HC
group. First, behavioral data showed that CA subjects
perceived the negative images as less negative than the
controls. Paralleling the behavioral data, brain imaging
data showed less activation throughout the emotion
network (in AMY, vlPFC, temporal-occipital cortex TOC) for the CA group, but this dampening of activity
was specific only to the fearful stimuli. Second, the CA
participants had increased errors in target detection
compared to controls, and this impairment was associated
with decreased activation in the cingulate gyrus and
temporal-parietal junction during target processing.
Lastly, behavioral data points to differences between CAs
and controls in how the emotion and executive networks
interact. Individual variance in reaction time to targets
was found to differ as a function of the preceding type of
emotional distracter and group. Specifically, the CA
group had greater individual reaction time variance for
targets following fear compared to controls and had
greater variance for targets that followed neutral images
compared to targets following other targets, whereas the
HC subjects had decreased reaction time variance for
targets following fear compared to targets following other
targets. Taken together, these data provide clinically
important and novel evidence of alterations in the neural
mechanisms underlying emotion and executive
processing in youth with psychopathologies. These
findings will also be discussed in the context of results
from analyses of brain imaging data investigating
variability in the BOLD response linked to the differences
in variance seen in the reaction time data.
39	  

	  

D-37
PROBABILISTIC LEARNING: A SCENARIO WHEN
ADULTS INFLUENCE ADOLESCENT BEHAVIOR
MORE THAN PEERS Frederico Lourenco*, Catherine
Hartley*, Johannes Decker, Andrew Drysdale, BJ Casey;
Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY; *Authors contributed
equally to this study - We all learn from trial-and-error
which actions are likely to be rewarded, a process
commonly modeled using error-driven reinforcementlearning algorithms. While experiential learning is critical
for adaptive function, exclusive reliance upon one's
experience would be inefficient and potentially
dangerous. We also depend upon the instructions or
advice of others to guide our actions. When explicit
information about action outcomes is available, trial-anderror learning may be de-prioritized, likely reflecting
prefrontal cortical modulation of striatal-dependent
experiential learning. During adolescence, peer influence
is thought to contribute to suboptimal decision-making
and increased risky behavior.
Thus, we wondered
whether the social source of instructions might modulate
the effect of explicit information on experiential learning.
To test this, we assessed how instructions given by a
similarly-aged peer and an older adult influence
experiential learning and bias choices during a
probabilistic learning task. Participants saw four stimuli
pairs: one pair consisted of a stimulus that would yield a
reward in 80% of trials versus another that was rewarded
the remaining 20% of trials. The other three pairs had
similarly skewed reward contingencies (70% versus 30%),
however for two of these pairs, a peer and an older
advisor, introduced as previous study participants, each
incorrectly recommended one of the lesser rewarded
stimuli as having a high reward probability. During the
training phase, participants received choice feedback, and
thus could potentially learn through experience that the
advice was inaccurate. In a subsequent test phase, all
possible pair combinations were presented and
participants received no feedback.
This test phase
enabled us to gauge the degree to which individuals
learned the stimuli reward value, or whether inaccurate
instructions impeded experiential value learning. We
hypothesized that adults, with stronger PFC-striatal
connectivity, would be more influenced by instruction
(perform more poorly) than adolescents whereas
adolescents might have an upper-hand by relying more
on subcortically-driven experiential learning. Moreover,
we hypothesized that adolescents would show a stronger
effect of peer advice versus older adult advice on their
choices. During the test phase, choices in both age groups
revealed a small instruction-consistent bias. Surprisingly,
whereas the inaccurate advice from an older adult
"expert" significantly reduced choice accuracy in both age
groups, the peer advice showed no effect. These data
suggest that peer influence in adolescence may be
diminished in the absence of a socially charged context. In
fact, both adolescents and adults appeared to be more
influenced by advice provided by an older adult,
suggesting both groups found those instructions to be

more credible.
In sum, we show evidence that peer
influence upon behavioral choices is context dependent.
When extrinsic non-social rewards are at stake, teens
appear to be just as influenced as adults by the advice of
an older adult, even when this advice is contradicted by
their own experience.
D-38
INCREASED FEELINGS OF DOCTOR-PATIENT
SIMILARITY PREDICT REDUCED PAIN RATING
DURING SIMULATED CLINICAL INTERACTIONS
Elizabeth Reynolds Losin, Luke J. Chang, Tor D. Wager;
University of Colorado, Boulder - Individuals from ethnic
minorities are most often treated by doctors of an
ethnicity different from their own. This ethnic
discordance has been linked to lower patient satisfaction
and is thought to be mediated in part by reduced feelings
of personal belief similarity between ethnically discordant
patients and doctors. Here we tested whether feelings of
similarity between doctors and patients (independent of
ethnicity) influenced pain perception during medical care.
A mixed-ethnicity group of 80 participants (4 per session)
was divided into two groups based on the similarity of
their self-reported political, religious, and gender beliefs,
and randomly assigned to the role of doctor or patient.
Each participant took part in two simulated clinical
interactions--one with an ingroup member and one with
an outgroup member--in which patients rated pain from
noxious thermal stimulation delivered by the doctor. We
found that patients reported feeling more similar to
ingroup doctors than outgroup doctors, and that the more
similar to their doctors the patients felt, the less pain they
reported. These findings suggest that interventions aimed
at increasing patients' feelings of similarity to their
doctors may decrease patient pain during medical care
regardless of ethnic concordance. Such interventions may
help mitigate the negative impact of the high prevalence
of ethnically discordant doctors on minority populations.

D-39
DISSOCIATED EFFECTS OF TEMPORAL AND
PREFRONTAL LESIONS ON IMPLICIT BIAS
CHANGE Jennifer T. Kubota (1), Rachel Mojdehbakhsh (1),
Jessica Dalyrmple (1), Karen Blackmon (1), Mahzarin R. Banaji
(2), & Elizabeth A. Phelps (1); (1) New York University, (2)
Harvard University - Previous research finds that exposure
to counterstereotypes decreases implicit racial bias. This
is thought to occur either by forming new salient
counterstereotypic associations, by increasing executive
control over implicit associations, or some combination of
the two factors. Research on race processing implicates
the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the regulation of implicit
racial bias. To assess the role of the PFC in implicit racial
bias and diminishing implicit racial bias via exposure to
counterstereotypes, patients with PFC lesions and
temporal lesions completed an implicit association test
(IAT), measuring the degree of association between Black
and White faces and pleasant and unpleasant words.
Following the IAT, patients read a counterstereotypic
story about a White assailant and a Black rescuer and then
40	  

	  

again, immediately following, completed the IAT.
Although patients with temporal lesions had significant
implicit bias on the initial IAT, patients with PFC lesions
had even greater implicit bias. Patients with PFC lesions
had greater implicit bias than control participants.
Following the counterstereoytpic story, patients with PFC
lesions and control participants had significantly reduced
and eliminated implicit bias whereas patients with
temporal lesions implicit bias did not differ from the first
IAT to the second. Additionally, a subset of patients with
PFC lesions read a control story. Implicit bias pre versus
post the control story did not differ for these patients.
These results indicate that the temporal lobe and PFC are
not critical for implicit race bias, but implicit bias
increases when the PFC is impaired. Patients with PFC
lesions and control participants can overcome implicit
bias via exposure to counterstereotypes.
Moreover,
decreases in implicit bias after exposure to
counterstereotypes relies in part on an intact temporal
lobe, suggesting that malleability of implicit bias after
exposure to counterstereotypes may occur because of the
formation of new salient counterstereotypic associations.
D-40
CAN SOCIAL CATEGORIES BE MANIPULATED?
EXPLORING THE IN-GROUP BIAS IN FACIAL
RECOGNITION USING A MINIMAL GROUP
PROCEDURE Maia T. Nguyen* and Lucy J. Troup*;
*Department of Psychology, Colorado State University; Social categorization has been found to influence
intergroup behavior, especially in the realm of facial
recognition. Participants asked to view faces grouped by
own university affiliation demonstrated greater
recognition performance for individuals associated with
their own university, regardless of the race of the face
presented. In other words, the own-race bias, or the
superior recognition of faces of one's own race, was
effectively suppressed for faces that were labeled as being
affiliated with one's own university. This suggests that
social categorization-university ties in this case-is a
driving factor in recognition accuracy. Minimal group
procedures have also been used as manipulations of social
categorization to create experimentally-induced social
ties. Several techniques have been used to separate
individuals into 'minimal groups' and induce the
experience of group membership, such as faux
personality quizzes and art ratings. Individuals that have
been categorized as either 'red' or 'green' based on
artificial tests have demonstrated a bias toward their ingroup members, based on facial recognition scores. The
act of studying names related to one's in-group is a robust
method of inducing minimal group categorization. This
study examined the effect of social categorization, using a
minimal group procedure, on facial recognition.
Participants were randomly assigned to an experimental
group, reading a list of names associated with their group
(red or green), or a control group, who did not read a list
of names and were not assigned to a group. This was
followed by a study phase in which participants studied
16 female and 16 male Caucasian faces. A final
recognition test was then conducted during which
participants were presented with 64 faces. Of these faces,

half were old and half were new; the old faces were
different photos of the same individuals seen in the study
phase. There were also an equal number of male and
female faces as well as in-group and out-group faces.
Results suggest evidence for a social-cognitive model of
facial recognition with an emphasis on the effects of social
categorization.
D-41
CULTURAL
IDENTITY
SHAPES
NEURAL
REACTIVITY TO PROSOCIAL DECISIONS Nicholas T.
Ichien, Yang Qu, Eva H. Telzer; University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign - Intergroup biases have a pervasive
impact on social perception and decision making; people
tend to show preference toward members of their own
social group (i.e. ingroup members) and occasional
derogation toward members not in their social group (i.e.
outgroup members). One specific case of this tendency
manifests through prosocial decision making as people
are more willing to share more resources with ingroup
members than with outgroup members. An effective
means of promoting group cohesion and prosperity, this
bias may serve an evolutionary adaptation; the more
cohesive and prosperous a social group is, the more likely
its members are to receive valuable social and physical
support and benefit from increased survival rates. The
mechanisms by which individuals choose to be more
prosocial towards ingroup members are unknown.
Functional MRI research has identified several brain
regions involved in prosocial behavior. In particular, the
ventral striatum, a brain region involved in reward
processing, tends to be as active or even more active
during prosocial rewards than personal rewards,
suggesting that helping others is intrinsically rewarding.
Additionally, brain regions involved in mentalizing (e.g.,
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex) are more active when
making prosocial decisions, suggesting that taking
another's perspective facilitates prosocial behavior.
Building upon prior neuroimaging work, we sought to
examine whether cultural group membership affects
neural processing during prosocial decisions to in- and
out-group members.
Twenty-six participants (13
American-born and 13 Chinese-born) completed a
decision-making task adapted from Zaki and Mitchell
(2011) during a functional brain scan. Prior to the scan,
participants interacted with two confederates who were
ostensibly completing a related task. One confederate was
American and the other was Chinese. To make cultural
group membership salient, the participant and
confederates played an icebreaker during which they
answered questions about themselves (e.g., favorite band;
favorite actor; favorite food). The confederates provided
answers that emphasized their group membership (e.g.,
favorite food: American=hamburger, Chinese=lo mein).
During the scan, participants were presented with a series
of financial offers. During each offer, participants saw a
picture of themselves and one other confederate with a
financial value above each picture; they had to decide to
either keep an amount of money for themselves (e.g.,
$2.00) or donate a different amount of money to the
confederate (e.g., $3.00). Prosocial decisions occurred
when participants donated money to a confederate at a
41	  

	  

cost to themselves. In addition, pure rewards trials did
not entail a possible donation to the confederate. All
participants made decisions regarding both the American
and Chinese confederates. Results indicate that prosocial
decisions to donate money to ingroup members were
associated with greater activity in the ventral striatum
and DMPFC than decisions to donate to outgroup
members. Importantly, prosocial decisions toward
ingroup members activated the ventral striatum more so
than when receiving pure monetary rewards. Thus,
helping members of one's own group is fundamentally
rewarding and may facilitate cohesion and support of the
ingroup. While prior research has found similar effects
when helping one's own kin, these findings extend to
one's broader cultural group.
D-42
THE EFFECT OF RACE & RACE BIAS ON MOTOR
IMITATION Troy C. Dildine, University of Colorado,
Boulder; Catherine J. Norris, Swarthmore College - Previous
research has shown that imitation promotes social
behaviors (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999; van Baaren,
Holland, Kawakami, & van Knippenberg, 2004) and is
increased toward ingroup members (Yabar, Johnston,
Miles, & Peace, 2006). The current study sought to
examine whether White individuals exhibit decreased
imitation of Black targets using a basic motor imitation
task (Bertenthal, Longo, & Kosobud, 2006). While event
related brain potentials (ERPs) were collected, White
participants viewed Black and White hands and made
button presses in response to either an observed finger
movement (finger cue) or to the appearance of a symbol
(symbolic cue). Some trials included both cues to examine
whether finger movements facilitated (when congruent
with symbolic cues) or interfered (when incongruent)
with responses, a pattern consistent with automatic motor
imitation. Reaction times indicated that White
participants exhibited greater automatic motor imitation
to White targets than to Black targets, as evidenced by
greater facilitation for congruent cues and greater
interference for incongruent cues. Furthermore, Black
targets elicited larger N1 and P2 amplitudes as compared
to White targets, indicating greater attentional resources
were deployed toward outgroup stimuli. Implications for
empathy and intergroup interactions are discussed.
Keywords: imitation, facilitation, interference, ingroup,
outgroup, N1, P2
D-43
STEREOTYPE
THREAT
AFFECTS
WOMEN'S
PERFORMANCE ON ATTENTIONAL BLINK TASK
Kelly A. Jordan; Adam Magerman; Eric Splan; Chad E. Forbes;
Psychology Department of University of Delaware - There is
little doubt that despite dramatic advancements in racial
and gender equality over the past 30 years, stigmatized
minorities and women still face an uphill battle when they
progress into the upper echelon of academia and math
related domains respectively. Past research indicates that
the negative stereotypes that target these groups have
particularly pervasive, detrimental effects on minorities'
and women's performance on high stakes tests like the

SAT and GRE, and possibly class tests in general.
Repeated exposure to situations that contribute to
underperformance, termed stereotype threat, may
ultimately undermine the extent to which minorities and
women identify and remain engaged with the academic
or math and science related (STEM) domains respectively.
Prior research has demonstrated reduced performance by
women under stereotype threat, in that, they
underperform on math tasks compared to men and
women who are not under stereotype threat. It is
unknown what the cognitive mechanisms behind these
findings are, one theory is that STEM related stimuli (i.e.
math problems) are threatening and holds attention thus
placing the women under cognitive load which in turn
affects their performance. The present research examined
the effects of stereotype threat on attention directly, by
employing an attentional blink (AB) paradigm that
utilized threatening (STEM related pictures with males in
them) and non-threatening stimuli (non-STEM academic
pictures with females in them). Participants were White
males and females. In study 1, we initially measured
participant's implicit math attitudes, all participants were
then placed under stereotype threat and performed the
AB task, a filler math task, manipulation check, attitudes
of self-enhancement, math-enhancement, and selfcompassion were measured (the questionnaires were
counterbalanced across participants). Results of study 1
provided partial support for our hypothesis in that,
women were less likely to report the stimuli at time point
2 (a nature scene) as visible following threatening stimuli
at time point 1 then men. There was a marginal
relationship between the individual difference between
self-enhancement and performance on the attentional
blink task, such that those with higher self-enhancement
scores performed better on the attentional blink task. ;
Study 2 examined the neural correlates underlying these
behaviors. Continuous EEG activity was recorded while
White male and female participants completed the tasks
described in study 1.
Results revealed interesting
interactions between brain regions important for selfperception and attention orientation. Together these
findings indicate that STEM related stimuli can be
considered threatening to women and affect their
encoding and processing of novel information in
situations of stereotype threat. This effect may be
attenuated by individual differences in self-enhancement,
which in moderate levels, may act as a buffer, shielding
women from the negative cognitive effects of stereotype
threat

D-44
THE NEURAL BASIS OF INHIBITING IRRELEVANT
STEREOTYPICAL ASSOCIATIONS IN PERSON
PERCEPTION Eric Hehman, Dartmouth College; Jonathan B.
Freeman, Dartmouth College - Individuals belong to
numerous social groups. To effectively navigate a
complex social world, previous theoretical and behavioral
work has demonstrated that individuals focus on a salient
42	  

	  

social identity when perceiving others, inhibiting all other
associations. However, the neural basis of how these
additional identities are inhibited has been relatively
unexplored. Thus, the current research focused on how
irrelevant associations with a target were suppressed
during person perception. Perceivers extract multiple
social dimensions from another's face (e.g., race, emotion),
and these dimensions can become linked due to
stereotype knowledge (e.g., Black individuals, angry).
Individuals who are counter to these stereotypes are
frequently encountered (e.g., happy Blacks), of course.
During these encounters, top-down stereotypes and
bottom-up perceptions conflict, and irrelevant stereotypic
associations (e.g., Black individuals, angry) must be
resolved to perceive such targets accurately. Using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the
current research examined how the brain resolves these
conflicts between facial cues and stereotype knowledge in
person perception. Participants (n=23) passively viewed
faces varying in race (e.g., Black, White) and emotion
(e.g., angry, happy) while neural activity was measured
using fMRI. Following scanning, participants categorized
these same targets by race and emotional expression
while hand movements en route to responses were
recorded using real-time hand-tracking. Conceptually
replicating previous research, across all participants,
results revealed that the medial prefrontal cortex and
anterior cingulate cortex exhibited linearly increasing
responses as race and emotion became stereotypically
more incongruent. Most importantly, participants who
had a stronger behavioral tendency to link race and
emotion stereotypically during categorization, as indexed
by subtle hand-movements, demonstrated greater
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) activation to targets
incongruent with stereotypes (all p's <.05 corrected).
Because the dlPFC has been linked with the suppression
of prepotent responses, these results suggest that
individuals with stronger behavioral tendencies to
perceive targets stereotypically exert greater neural
resources to inhibit inaccurate stereotypical links in order
to perceive others accurately. This research is the first to
link fMRI with real-time measurement of behavioral
tendencies to stereotype, and helps reveal the neural basis
of how conflicting stereotypes at the nexus of multiple
social dimensions are resolved.

D-45
THE IMPACT OF TARGET RACE ON NEURAL
RESPONSES DURING THREAT DETECTION Keith B.
Senholzi, University of Colorado Boulder, Department of
Psychology and Neuroscience; Brendan E. Depue, University of
Colorado Boulder, Department of Psychology and
Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, The Institute of
Cognitive Science; Marie T. Banich, University of Colorado
Boulder, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience,
University of Colorado Boulder, The Institute of Cognitive

Science; Tiffany A. Ito, University of Colorado Boulder,
Department of Psychology and NeuroscienceThis study
examined the neural mechanisms underlying threat
detection to targets of different races. During fMRI,
participants determined whether Black and White
individuals held weapons. Participants were faster to
"shoot" armed Blacks than armed Whites, but faster to
"not shoot" unarmed Whites than unarmed Blacks. Brain
activity in parietal and visual cortical regions was
preferentially heightened for armed Blacks than armed
Whites, suggesting heightened visual attention and
processing to more stereotypically threatening targets.
Increased anterior cingulate cortex activation occurred for
unarmed Whites than unarmed Blacks, suggesting greater
response conflict and increased cognitive control was
elicited by unarmed Whites. Seed-based functional
connectivity of the amygdala revealed greater coherence
with both parietal and visual cortices for armed Blacks vs.
armed Whites than any other contrast. Furthermore,
greater implicit Black-danger associations were associated
with increased amygdala activation to armed Blacks, as
compared to armed Whites. Our findings indicate that the
neural mechanisms underlying target race differences in
threat detection involving decisions to shoot and not
shoot are dissociable, and further that race information
and implicit biases influence how people perceive and
process threat information.
D-46
ARE
OTHER-RACE
EFFECTS
OF
EMOTION
VIEWPOINT SENSITIVE? Christopher D'Lauro and Juli
Nokleberg; Department for Behavioral Sciences and Leadership;
US Air Force Academy - How do specific viewpoints of
faces reflect the brain's perceptual representations of race
and emotion? Recent evidence shows that contrary to
prior beliefs, people have more difficulty identifying
certain facial expressions in other race faces than in same
race faces (Jack, Caldara, & Schyns, 2012). The current
study uses behavioral data to assess the degree to which
the facial representations for race and emotional
expressions overlap and interfere with each other in a
viewpoint-sensitive manner. Prior studies demonstrated
that prolonged viewing of a face turned to one viewpoint
(e.g. turned 30 degrees right) will make subsequently
viewed frontal faces appear to be turned in the opposite
direction (i.e. slightly to the left).
This viewpoint
aftereffect of repetition adaptation may then be used to
discern the similarity of faces' neural representations with more similar faces showing greater transference of
viewpoint aftereffects (Fang, Ijichi, & He, 2007). This
current work employs the repetition adaptation paradigm
to show the view-sensitivity of the other race effect in
identifying facial expressions. In each experimental trial,
participants first adapt to a face (facing 30 degrees, left or
right) for 4 seconds, then view a brief mask (150-300ms),
followed by the test face turned 3 degrees to the left or
right, or presented frontally (400ms). Participants respond
by indicating whether the test face is turned to the left or
right. The test faces may differ from the adapting faces in
terms of race or facial expression. Diminished viewpoint
aftereffects for other race faces or different facial
expressions point to greater separation in their underlying
43	  

	  

representations.
D-47
THE EFFECT OF ETHNICITY ON NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
EVALUATING
SOCIAL
INTERACTIONS Yuta Katsumi, Suhkyung Kim, Keen
Sung, & Sanda Dolcos; University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign; University of Massachusetts Amherst - Being
able to accurately understand and evaluate others'
intentions and actions plays an important role in
successful social interactions. Individuals typically rely
not only on what they hear in conversations, but also a
range of non-verbal cues, including facial expressions and
body language, in order to form impressions of and
further evaluate others. Moreover, such evaluative
judgments may also be influenced by whether or not
individuals identify with their interaction partners in
terms of social characteristics such as ethnicity. Previous
investigations have revealed the role of ethnicity on how
individuals process and incorporate such information in
their decision-making. However, little is known about the
extent to which perception of ethnicity may be linked to
evaluative judgments in a social context, and about its
neural correlates. In the present study, 20 Caucasian
participants (10 females) viewed and rated a series of
movies illustrating non-verbal guest-host interactions in a
business setting, while fMRI data were recorded.
Ethnicity of the hosts was separated into 50% Caucasian
(in-group) and 50% Non-Caucasian (out-group) trials. The
hosts displayed behaviors that either encouraged
(Approach condition) or discouraged (Avoid condition)
further social interaction. Behavioral analysis yielded a
significant difference, such that participants rated
Avoidance behaviors displayed by out-group hosts lower
than those displayed by in-group hosts. Brain imaging
analysis identified specific regions showing common and
dissociable activity in response to avoidance behaviors
displayed by in-group and out-group hosts. Common
regions included a host of areas from the social cognition
network, including the posterior superior temporal
sulcus, inferior parietal lobule, and lateral prefrontal
cortex. Further analyses revealed that the in-group/Avoid
relative to out-group/Avoid condition was associated
with increased activity in the posterior insula, precuneus,
and middle temporal gyrus, while the out-group/Avoid
relative to in-group/Avoid condition was associated with
increased activity in a broader network of regions,
including the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, inferior
frontal gyrus, anterior insula, temporo-parietal junction,
and bilateral fusiform gyrus. Interestingly, insula showed
dissociable responses to the hosts' ethnicity, such that its
posterior region showed increased activity for avoidance
behaviors displayed by in-group hosts, whereas the
anterior region showed increased activity for those
displayed by out-group hosts. Overall, these findings
provide evidence for both common and dissociable
responses in the social cognition network to avoidance
behaviors displayed by in-group and out-group members,
and point to dissociable patterns of response in the insula
indexing opposing sensitivity to ethnicity-related ingroup and out-group members.

D-48
AGENDA-BASED REGULATION IN THE OWN-RACE
BIAS: EXAMINING THE ROLE PLAYED BY
AROUSAL Hillary Wehe - Colorado State University; Sarah
DeLozier - Colorado State University- Learners show better
recognition for faces of their own race, compared to faces
of other-race individuals, a finding termed the own-race
bias (ORB). One account for this phenomena, socialcategorization, suggests this decreased recognition may
be due to a lack of motivation to differentiate between
other-race faces. In support of this model, current
research (DeLozier & Rhodes, 2013) has given learners an
agenda-based goal of achieving a high total point score by
correctly recognizing high- and low-value own-and other
race faces. Results showed that point value could be used
as a motivator to increase recognition for high-value ownrace faces. Under some circumstances, point value also
increased recognition for high-value other-race faces,
reducing the ORB and providing some support for socialcategorization. As such, it is possible that other factors
besides motivation may contribute to the ORB. In the
current series of experiments, we investigated the effect of
arousal as a possible moderator of the ORB. Experiment 1
used a between-subjects design, with a control group
receiving the standard point value instructions, and the
experimental group receiving an "Asian disease" survival
scenario with this same point-value agenda. Learners
were told that the point-values presented with each face
represented the number of times that individual had been
exposed to the deadly Asian disease. Therefore, learners
were told, it was very important to recognize high-value
faces in order to decrease their chances of catching this
disease. Of primary interest, we collected pre- and posttest ratings of arousal and valence. Data collection is
ongoing, with preliminary analyses showing increased
recognition for high-value faces.
D-49
SHARED BELIEFS ENHANCE SHARED FEELINGS:
RELIGIOUS/IRRELIGIOUS
IDENTIFICATIONS
MODULATE EMPATHIC NEURAL RESPONSES Shihui
Han, Siyuan Huang; Department of Psychology; PKUIDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research; Peking
University, Beijing, China; - Recent research has revealed
stronger empathic neural responses to same-race
compared to other-race individuals. Is this in-group
favoritism in empathy specific to race identification or a
more general effect of social identification - including that
based on religious/irreligious beliefs? The present study
investigated whether and how intergroup relationship
based on religious/irreligious identifications modulates
empathic neural responses to others' pain. We recorded
event related brain potentials (ERPs) from Christian and
atheist participants to perceived pain or neutral
expressions of faces that were marked as being Christians
or atheists. We found that both Christian and atheist
participants showed greater neural activity to pain (vs.
neutral) expressions at 132-168 and 200-320 ms over the
frontal region to those with the same (vs. different)
religious/irreligious beliefs. In-group favoritism in
44	  

	  

empathic neural responses was also evident at a later time
window (412-612 ms) over the central/parietal regions in
Christian but not in atheist participants. Our results
indicate that intergroup relationships based on shared
beliefs, either religious or irreligious, produces in-group
favoritism in empathy for others' suffering.
D-50
EMPATHIC NEURAL RESPONSES DIFFERENTIALLY
PREDICT HELPING BEHAVIOR DURING THE
TRANSITION
TO
ADOLESCENCE:
A
LONGITUDINAL FMRI STUDY John C. Flournoy, Allison
Tackman, William E. Moore III , John C. Mazziotta , Marco
Iacoboni , Mirella Dapretto, Jennifer Pfeifer; Department of
Psychology, University of Oregon; Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain
Mapping Center; UCLA-FPR Center for Culture, Brain, &
Development- Background: Though much literature in
psychology has explored empathy as a possible motivator
of prosocial behavior, results have been mixed, and
authors have suggested that this may be due to
differences in paradigms and definitions (Eisenberg and
Miller, 1987). Recent neuroimaging work seeks to address
definitional issues by measuring trait empathy as brain
activity during performance of empathy related tasks. For
example, neural activity during a perspective-taking
sympathy task correlated with self-reported empathy and
predicted real-world prosocial behavior in adults
(Rameson et al., 2011). Other research, probing the shared
experiencing aspect of empathy known as affective
resonance has found brain regions that are active during
both experience and observation of pain, and that this
activity relates to differences in self-report empathy
(Singer et al., 2004). However, no research has
investigated whether differences in affective resonance
neural activity motivate prosocial behavior, and very little
is known about the development of these brain networks.
What little is known suggests that affective resonance
may either increase or decrease prosocial behavior,
depending on other factors such as stage of development.
In an analysis of a subset of the data employed in the
present research, in 10-year-olds, brain activity from
regions involved in both observation and imitation of
emotional faces was positively related to both self-report
empathic concern and personal distress (Pfeifer et al.,
2008). While self-report empathy is positively related to
helping behavior during pre- and early-adolescence,
personal distress is associated with less helping
(Eisenberg et al., 1991). Because emotional reactivity
outpaces development of regulation during the transition
between childhood and adolescence, affective resonance
may be expected to hinder prosocial behavior, at least for
some part of this developmental period. We examine
affective resonance as a motivator of prosocial behavior
during the transition between childhood and adolescence.
Methods: Participants visited the lab on two occasions,
first at age 10 (N=90) and again at age 13 (N=57). A subset
(N=55) provided good fMRI data at both timepoints. fMRI
Task: Participants observed and imitated emotional
expressions (happy, neutral, scared, angry, and sad).
Regions of interest were defined by assessing the
conjunction of voxels significantly more active during
imitation of negative affect than during rest, and

significantly more active during observation of negative
affect than during rest. The conjunction analysis
attempted to reject the conjunction null at p < .005, k > 10.
Self-report measures: Real-world prosocial behavior is
measured as the number of hours per week spent
"helping other people without getting paid...to make your
city a better place." Other scales measured empathy,
prosocial intentions, and child perceptions of parents'
helping behavior. Preliminary Results: For boys only,
activity in regions involved in both imitation and
observation positively predict hours volunteered at age
10, and negatively predict volunteering at age 13
D-51
INFANT ATTACHMENT PREDICTS BODILY FREEZE
IN ADOLESCENCE Hannah C.M. Niermann 1,2, Verena Ly
1,2, Sanny Smeekens1, Bernd Figner 1,2, J. Marianne RiksenWalraven 1, Karin Roelofs 1,2; Affiliations: ; 1 Behavioural
Science Institute (BSI), Radboud University Nijmegen, The
Netherlands; 2 Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The NetherlandsFreezing is a major defensive stress-response in animals.
It is characterized by reduced body motion and decreased
heart rate. Amplified freeze-reactions have been observed
in both animals and humans with a history of anxiety and
traumatization and enhance the chance of later
psychopathology. Studies in rodents and primates have
shown that the experience of early life-stressors,
particularly maternal deprivation, is associated with longlasting deviations in primary defensive stress-responses,
such as enhanced freeze-reactions. In humans, the
relationship between infant-parent attachment and
defensive
freeze-reactions
remains
unstudied.
Understanding this relationship in humans is critical to
advance our knowledge of the development of primary
defensive stress-reactions in humans and is important for
translational research in animals and humans. Therefore,
this prospective longitudinal study investigated whether
insecure (compared to secure) attachment in human
infants-reflecting a history of low quality parental
responsiveness and sensitivity to the infants' needs-is
related to increased freeze-reactions to social threat in
adolescents. By means of a stabilometric force platform,
we measured reductions in body sway (freeze) in
response to angry, neutral, and happy faces in 79 14-yearold adolescents from the Nijmegen Longitudinal Study.
Infant-parent attachment security of these participants
had been classified at 15 months of age using the Strange
Situation Procedure (Ainsworth et al., 1978). A repeatedmeasures ANOVA with body-sway as dependent
variable, Emotion (angry, happy, neutral) as withinsubject factor, and Attachment (secure, insecure) as
between-subject factor showed the expected significant
Emotion x Attachment interaction (F(2, 76) = 3.23, p =
.045, Œ∑2 = .08). Follow-up analyses indicated that only
the Emotion contrast of angry versus neutral
demonstrated a significant interaction with Attachment
(F(1, 77) = 6.52, p = .013, Œ∑2 = .08), which was specific
for the insecurely attached participants (F(1, 22) = 9.16, p
= .006, Œ∑2 = .29) but not for their securely attached
counterparts (F(1, 55) = 0.20, p = .661, Œ∑2 = .00). In
conclusion, the results of this prospective longitudinal
45	  

	  

study suggest that insecure infant-parent attachment is
associated with adolescents' enhanced freeze-reactions to
socially threatening relative to neutral faces. These results
suggest that the effects of early negative caregiving
experiences on the human stress-system extend to very
basic defensive freeze-reactions, which are objectively
detectable during adolescence. This research opens
venues to start exploring the role of freeze in the
development of human psychopathology.
D-52
WHAT THE BRAIN "LIKES:" NEURAL CORRELATES
OF
SOCIAL
MEDIA
ENGAGEMENT
IN
ADOLESCENCE Lauren E. Sherman; Patricia M. Greenfield;
Jessica J. Chiang; Leanna M. Hernandez; Devora Beck-Pancer;
Mirella Dapretto - University of California, Los Angeles Social media plays an important role in peer interaction
during adolescence and young adulthood, and many of
the socioemotional processes enacted online actually
parallel those in youths' offline lives. It is likely that
simple, quantifiable indices of online social endorsemente.g., "likes"-serve as powerful motivators in adolescence, a
developmental period characterized by heightened
sensitivity to peer influence. This hypothesis, however,
has yet to be empirically examined. Neurotypical
adolescents (age range 15-18 years) underwent functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while completing a
task that mimics the popular social photo-sharing
application Instagram. Participants viewed a feed of
photographs ostensibly submitted by peers and decided
whether to press one of two buttons: "Like" indicated that
they "liked" the image, whereas "Next" indicated that they
wished to move forward without "liking" the image.
Furthermore,
participants
submitted
their
own
photographs for inclusion in the feed, and received
feedback on how many peers had ostensibly "liked" their
images. Using region of interest analyses in the ventral
striatum (VS) and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), we tested
the hypothesis that reward circuitry would be recruited to
a greater extent when participants a) chose "Like" (versus
"Next") and b) received many "likes" (versus few) on their
own images. In addition to our a priori ROI analyses, we
also performed whole-brain analyses to examine how
other brain areas, if any, might be implicated. As
predicted, during trials in which participants pressed
"Like" (versus "Next), the bilateral VS (peak MNI
coordinates x =12, y = 10, z = -2) and the bilateral OFC
(peak MNI coordinates x = -34, y = 28, z= 10) were
significantly activated. Whole-brain analyses revealed
that significant activation was not limited to the reward
circuit, but included the dorsal striatum, the cingulate and
paracingulate cortices, and regions of the posterior
parietal cortex implicated in the central executive
network. The reverse contrast (i.e., "Next" greater than
"Like") yielded no areas of significant activation. Viewing
one's own photographs with many likes from peers (vs.
few likes) also activated the VS (peak MNI coordinates x
=-4, y = 4, z = 2) and OFC (peak MNI coordinates x =28, y
= 14, z = -16). Whole-brain analyses revealed that
receiving many likes was also associated with activation
in the thalamus, insula, and regions of the default mode
network (e.g., precuneous, medial prefrontal cortex). The

reverse contrast (i.e., receiving few versus many "likes")
yielded no significant activation. Our results suggest that
reward circuitry may play an important role in social
networking when it comes to both providing and
receiving feedback. In both cases, the provision or receipt
of positive feedback elicited greater neural responses not
only in reward circuitry but across several other regions
as well. These findings support the hypothesis that
adolescents are avid users of social media because they
find the nature of social interaction afforded by these
tools to be motivating. Indeed, the very fact that "likes"
are straightforward, immediate, and quantifiable may
contribute to their appeal and enhance reward-learning
processes that occur on social media.
D-53
THE NEURO-ENDOCRINE CONTROL OF SOCIOEMOTIONAL ACTIONS IN ADOLESCENCE Anna
Tyborowska [1,2], Inge Volman [1,2], Sanny Smeekens [1],
Ivan Toni [2], Karin Roelofs [1,2]; [1] Radboud University
Nijmegen, Behavioural Science Institute, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands; [2] Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands; - When frontal control of socio-emotional
behavior fails, people fall back on automatic action
tendencies to either approach or avoid social stimuli.
Chronic failure of this control has been observed in social
anxiety as well as aggression-related disorders. The
anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC) has been shown to be
crucial for controlling these automatic action tendencies.
These observations are particularly relevant for
neurobiological models of adolescent development.
During adolescence, social-affective processes undergo
important changes on both the behavioral and neural
level. Crucially, there is an imbalance between already
developed limbic/striatal structures and a still maturing
prefrontal cortex, likely resulting in less top-down control
of emotional tendencies. Interestingly, pubertal stage and
the accompanying hormonal changes have been shown to
modulate the processing of socio-emotional stimuli in
these neural networks. With the development of many
emotional disorders peaking during adolescence, it is
essential to understand the neurobiological mechanisms
underlying control of automatic action tendencies during
this age. Using an fMRI adapted social ApproachAvoidance (AA) Task, we assessed the behavioral and
neural properties of emotional action control during a
critical transition phase in adolescence. A total of 47
adolescents (21 males) were tested at 14 years of age.
Salivary testosterone measurements were collected and
served as an indicator of pubertal development.
Behavioral and fMRI analysis were controlled for gender
effects. During the AA-Task, participants had to evaluate
the emotional expression (happy, angry) of faces and
respond by either pulling a joystick toward (approach) or
away (avoidance) from themselves. Affect-congruent
conditions
involved
intuitive
stimulus-response
mappings (i.e. approach-happy and avoid-angry faces). In
contrast,
affect-incongruent
conditions
required
participants to override these automatic action tendencies
in order to meet task demands (i.e. approach-angry and
avoid-happy faces). As has been shown in previous adult
46	  

	  

studies, participants have faster affect-congruent
responses than affect-incongruent responses due to the
increased demands of the latter, when automatic
tendencies need to be controlled.
In the current
adolescent sample this behavioral congruency effect
(affect-incongruent vs. affect-congruent) was significantly
replicated. fMRI analysis further revealed a significant
congruency effect in frontal and striatal regions that was
differently modulated by testosterone levels. High
testosterone individuals showed greater aPFC activity
when controlling their automatic action tendencies, while
low testosterone individuals showed greater subcortical
(thalamus and caudate) activity. Moreover, behavioral
performance was not affected by testosterone levels,
suggesting that the recruitment of different neural
systems does not immediately affect task performance.
These results suggest that in early puberty, the more
mature subcortical structures (compared to prefrontal) are
recruited for controlling automatic action tendencies.
With increased pubertal development, there is a transition
to
maturing
prefrontal
control
systems.
This
developmental switch is most likely the result of ongoing
neural reorganization and hormonal changes that take
place during this period.
D-54
CHILDREN ARE LESS WILLING TO DELAY
GRATIFICATION WITH AN UNTRUSTWORTHY
EXPERIMENTER Laura Michaelson*, Rachel Lahoda, Anjela
Sargent, Yuko Munakata; University of Colorado BoulderEarly indices of willingness to wait for delayed rewards
show remarkable stability across the lifespan. In the
classic delay of gratification task, the number of seconds a
preschooler waits for two marshmallows, rather than
choosing to eat one marshmallow immediately, predicts
academic achievement, social competence, and physical
health later in life (Ayduk et al., 2000; Mischel et al., 1989;
Shoda et al., 1990). Theories of delaying gratification
largely focus on reward sensitivity and self-control, and
associated neural regions in the ventral striatum, nucleus
accumbens, and prefrontal cortex (e.g., Casey et al., 2011).
Despite a growing literature demonstrating the role of
social factors in cognitive processes, social influences in
delaying gratification have been largely overlooked. The
present work tests whether social trust might play a
central role in children's willingness to delay gratification.
Children may only opt to delay gratification in
trustworthy social contexts, when they are confident that
delayed rewards will actually be delivered.
Social trust
influences delaying gratification in adults (Michaelson, de
la Vega, Chatham, & Munakata, 2013). However, it is
unclear whether social trust plays a role in childhood, and
might contribute to the stability of self-control across the
lifespan. Decreasing trust by failing to deliver a promised
reward increases preschoolers' preferences for immediate
gratification (Kidd, Palmeri, & Aslin, 2012; Mahrer, 1956);
however, because trust is confounded with rewards in
such studies, such manipulations could influence delay
choices via the effects of rewards on factors such as selfcontrol and mood, which are known to affect delay of
gratification. Moreover, social trust could play less of a
role in delaying gratification early in development, when

children's notable limitations in self-control could be more
of a determining factor.
The present study thus
manipulated social trust in preschoolers in the absence of
rewards, to test effects on delaying gratification.
Thirty-four preschoolers were assigned to one of two
conditions.
In the trustworthy condition, the
experimenter accidentally damaged a confederate's art
projects and was honest about it; in the untrustworthy
condition, the experimenter intentionally damaged the art
projects and lied about it.
The experimenter then
administered the classic marshmallow task. With a
trustworthy experimenter, children waited almost twice
as long without eating the marshmallow (M = 10.99 min)
compared to an untrustworthy experimenter (M = 5.79
min), W = 212, p = .02, and were also more likely to wait
the full 15 min delay period (71% versus 18%, X2 = 7.64, p
= .006). Conditions did not differ terms of mood,
suggesting effects on delay of gratification were specific
to differences in social trust.
This work complements
existing evidence using hypothetical manipulations and
rewards in adults, and highlights the importance of social
trust in early willingness to delay rewards. Given that
early delay abilities can be diagnostic of important later
life outcomes, incorporating the trust factor is broadly
relevant, both in terms of an improved understanding of
failures to delay, and for expanding existing neural
profiles to incorporate regions associated with social trust,
such as the caudate nucleus (King-Casas et al., 2005).

D-55
HEIGHTENED INFLUENCE OF UNPREDICTABILITY
ON EMOTIONAL INTERFERENCE AND STRIATAL
RESPONSE
TO
POSITIVE
STIMULI
IN
ADOLESCENTS Catherine Insel, Alea C. Skwara, Stephanie
F. Sasse, Erik K. Kastman, Leah H. Somerville; Harvard
University, Department of Psychology Prior work has
demonstrated that adolescents are especially sensitive to
rewards and appetitive emotional cues, and rewardrelated responses have been shown to interfere with
cognitive processes. Though uncertainty potentiates
affective responding and is a key feature in models of
reinforcement learning, it is not clear whether
predictability is a key mediating variable on a) adolescent
reward sensitivity, and b) the capacity for affective cues to
disrupt cognitive processes. In this study, participants
aged 9-22 completed an emotion-interference task in
which predictability and valence were manipulated while
undergoing fMRI scanning. Participants viewed blocks of
positive, neutral, and negative scenes and were asked to
complete a concurrent task (determining whether it was
an indoor or outdoor scene). For some blocks of images,
temporal predictability cues were provided so that
participants were aware of the timing of the forthcoming
image, and for others the timing was unpredictable, with
a random sequence of numbers. Overall, response times
were slower for the unpredictably relative to the
predictably timed images. There was also a main effect of
47	  

	  

valence, whereby participants were slowest to respond to
negative images, intermediate for positive images, and
fastest for neutral images. These findings suggest that
both positive and negative emotional cues result in
increased emotional interference on concurrent task
performance. Comparing adolescents to adults revealed
maximal interference for unpredictable positive events in
early adolescence, as measured by reaction time
differences for unpredictable relative to predictable
positive events. FMRI results revealed that adolescents
showed heightened responses in the ventral striatum for
positive relative to neutral images relative to adults.
Further, these effects were driven by increased sensitivity
to unpredictable positive events in adolescents. Ongoing
analyses are examining the effects of predictability on
subjective ratings of image valence and arousal. In
addition, we are investigating the trial-by-trial effects of
unpredictability and self-reported valence and intensity to
reveal parametric effects on emotional responses and
interference resolution. Overall, these findings suggest
that uncertainty is a critical mediating factor of adolescent
sensitivity to affectively positive cues.
D-56
ON THE REWARDING PROSPECT OF BECOMING
ONESELF: SOCIAL INFLUENCES ON REWARD
ACTIVITY DURING ADOLESCENCE Will Moore,
University of Oregon; Jennifer Pfeifer, University of Oregon
- The notion that self and reward are related at a
fundamental neural level has recently garnered
considerable empirical attention (Northoff & Hayes,
2011), and the developmental trajectories for shared
networks that mediate these processes have even been
preliminarily studied in the context of aging (Grady,
Grigg, & Ng, 2012). However, the younger end of the
developmental spectrum has yet to be explored in this
regard. Over time, socially rewarding actions shape not
only an individual's noetic sense of self-concept, but also
pre-potent behavioral tendencies in interpersonal
contexts. As such, acknowledging that self and reward are
deeply intertwined (if not inextricable) concepts is likely
to yield a fruitful approach for designing robust empirical
investigations of brain and behavior across development.
Adolescence is an ideal developmental epoch for
investigating the emerging self in the context of reward
learning, in part because during this time social influences
become increasingly evident in decisions about "who we
are" and "what we do" (Blakemore & Robbins, 2012;
Pfeifer & Peake, 2011). We know that adolescents make
more risky decisions than adults or children (Burnett,
Bault, Coricelli, & Blakemore, 2010), particularly in the
presence of peers (Chein et al., 2011; Steinberg, 2008), a
context which heightens their preferences for immediate
rewards (O'Brien et al., 2011). Such social influences on
decision-making might be partially mediated via the
impact of rewarding peer interactions on self-perceptions.
For example, adolescents and young adults exhibit
activity in reward networks in response to favorable peer
evaluations of the self (Davey, Allen, Harrison, Dwyer, &
Yücel, 2009), and both neural and behavioral indicators of
"value" are triggered when adults disclose information
about themselves to others (Tamir & Mitchell, 2012). At a

more basic level, several investigations have reported
overlapping patterns of striatal activity for rewarding and
self-relevant stimuli (Ersner-Hershfield, Wimmer, &
Knutson, 2009; Fliessbach et al., 2007), and a specific
region of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) known as
the perigenual anterior cingulate cortex (pACC) has been
directly implicated in carrying out both personally
relevant and reward-related cognition (Enzi et al., 2009).
Yet pACC responses are also modulated by context, as
recently demonstrated by its involvement in multiple
aspects of social comparison processes including the
calculation of personal relevance and self-similarity of
judgment targets (Moore, Merchant, Kahn, & Pfeifer,
2013). In order to further investigate social influences on
reward processing, we are in the process of collecting and
analyzing neuroimaging data from a sample of 30 early
adolescents (ages 11-13 years). Participants complete a
probabilistic decision making task (Cohen et al., 2010)
while undergoing fMRI in both a 'private' condition and
also in a 'social' condition, during which they are told that
an age- and gender-matched peer is observing their
performance. Assessment of the relationships between
neural responses to reward outcomes and model based
decision signals (e.g., decision value and prediction error)
will help us to more precisely characterize social
influences on reward learning, and results will be
discussed in the context of the emergent adolescent self.

D-57
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
MULTISENSORY
EMOTION PERCEPTION IN AGING Jamie Klein, the
College of William and Mary; Paul Kieffaber, the College of
William and Mary - Stimuli are perceived using multiple
senses in the phenomenon of multisensory integration
(MSI). Behavioral studies have demonstrated that, while
older adults suffer deficits in the identification of both
emotional faces and voices, they derive greater
enhancement from MSI than younger adults.
One
explanation for this phenomenon is that older adults
benefit from the phenomenon of inverse effectiveness, in
which less salient stimuli result in increased MSI. Older
adults' deficits in hearing and vision may require them to
rely on MSI for accurate social perception. In this study,
electroencephalography (EEG) was used to identify
neural
components
associated
with
emotional
multisensory perception in younger (M=19.07 years) and
older (M=82.73 years) adults. A novel task was used to
determine the neural correlates of emotion MSI, which
included multisensory stimuli presented simultaneously
rather than consecutive face-voice presentation.
Significant differences were found between congruent
and incongruent emotional stimuli as early as 120 ms after
stimulus presentation, with congruent face-voice pairs
producing
enhanced
auditory
N1
components.
Additionally, multisensory enhancement for auditory N1
was correlated with hearing loss at high frequencies for
older adults. These findings suggest that the degree to
which older adults utilize MSI for emotion perception is
indeed related to sensory deficits.

48	  

	  

D-58
ADDING INSULT TO INJURY? CHRONIC PEER
VICTIMIZATION
ACROSS
DEVELOPMENT
HEIGHTENS
ADOLESCENTS'
NEURAL
SENSITIVITY TO SOCIAL EXCLUSION Michelle E.
Miernicki, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Karen
D. Rudolph, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign;
Wendy Troop-Gordon, North Dakota State University; Eva H.
Telzer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign - Peer
victimization is a salient and potentially traumatic social
stressor that confers significant emotional costs for youth.
Yet, we know little about the processes through which
peer victimization "gets under the skin." Neuroimaging
research in normative samples of adults and adolescents
shows social exclusion activates neural regions implicated
in the affective component of physical pain (e.g., dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex [dACC], anterior insula); we
hypothesized exposure to chronic peer victimization
during childhood would heighten neural sensitivity to
social exclusion during adolescence. This study tracked
youths' exposure to victimization across seven years, from
mid-childhood through mid-adolescence, examining the
implications of a personal history of chronic victimization
for neural processing of social exclusion. Thirty-seven
female adolescents were recruited from a longitudinal
study that followed youth annually from the 2nd9thgrade. Chronic victimization exposure was determined
based on self-reported victimization on the Social
Experiences Questionnaire-Revised (e.g., "How often do
other kids leave you out on purpose?") assessed annually
from 2nd-8th grade. During the summer following 9th
grade, we recruited 19 chronically victimized adolescents
(i.e., scored > .75 SD above the mean on victimization for
at least three years; average number of years
victimized=4.47) and 18 non-victimized adolescents (i.e.,
scored< .75 one standard deviation below the mean on
victimization for at least three years; average number of
years non-victimized=4.78) to complete a functional brain
scan. During the scan, adolescents completed Cyberball, a
widely used task that manipulates social exclusion. Youth
were told they would be playing an on-line ball-throwing
game with two peers (ostensibly in another room). During
the game, the ball is thrown between players. In reality,
there are no other players and the game is
preprogrammed. Participants played two rounds. In the
first (inclusion) round, the participant is equally included
in the ball tosses. In the second (exclusion) round, the
participant is excluded after ten throws. For the rest of the
game, the other players only throw the ball amongst
themselves. Neuroimaging results indicated adolescent
girls with a history of chronic victimization show greater
activation than non-victimized girls in the exclusion
compared to inclusion condition in brain regions
implicated in social pain (insula, dACC), affective arousal
(amygdala), and emotion regulation (ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex). Chronically victimized girls also
showed heightened activation relative to non-victimized
girls in the ventral striatum, a region that has previously
shown heightened activation during social exclusion
among youth (Masten et al., 2011), and has been
suggested to be involved in emotion regulation during
adolescence (Pfeifer et al., 2011). A history of chronic peer

victimization appears to get under the skin by
heightening neural sensitivity to social exclusion during
adolescence. Thus, the experience of peer exclusion may
be a more emotional (i.e., amygdala activation) and
painful (i.e., insula, dACC activation) experience for
adolescents who were chronically victimized in their
childhood, perhaps necessitating them to engage in
greater regulation. This research suggests neural
processes may contribute to the long-term costs of early
social stressors by sensitizing youth to negative social
experiences.
D-59
WHY DO BRAIN-TRAINING INTERVENTIONS
FAIL?
THE
DOUBLE-EDGED
SWORD
OF
PROACTIVE CONTROL Elliot T. Berkman, Lauren E.
Kahn, Junaid S. Merchant, University of Oregon - A growing
and increasingly profitable online industry has recently
emerged selling "brain-training" services that promise to
increase intelligence and executive function. However,
independent studies on these services provide (at best)
equivocal support for their effectiveness, particularly in
terms of whether the performance gains earned on the
training tasks transfer to untrained tasks (so-called
"transfer effects"). A major impediment to understanding
and predicting transfer effects is a paucity of theoretical
accounts of how brain-training interventions are
supposed to work. In this talk, we will provide one such
account based on an application of Braver's Dual
Mechanisms of Control (DMC) model to neurocognitive
training, and then present a study that tested the
predictions of this updated model in the context of a
longitudinal study of self-control training (N=30 per
group, each scanned pre- and post-training or active
control intervention). The DMC model describes two
different modes of control, proactive and reactive, with
the former being more effective but more resource
intensive and the latter being less effective but less costly,
and identifies factors such as motivation and resource
availability that determine whether proactive or reactive
control is recruited. Our study adds to this theory by
showing that training engenders a shift from reactive to
proactive control, above and beyond other factors.
However, this shift came at a cost: proactive control
became associated with specific cues that signaled the
upcoming need for control. This result explains why
performance gains on training tasks do not always
generalize to novel tasks. If training improves
performance by forming cue-control associations that
trigger proactive control, then proactive control will only
engage when training cues are integrated into other tasks.
We discuss null results in the training literature in light of
our results and describe a path forward for creating
theory-based
and
generalizable
brain-training
interventions for inhibitory control.
D-60
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL
TRAITS
ACROSS
COLLEGE DRINKERS AND NON DRINKERS IN
RESPONSE TO A TEMPORAL AUDITORY TASK
Barbara C. Banz - Colorado State University; Alana M.
49	  

	  

Campbell - University of North Carolina; Deana B. Davalos Colorado State University - Alcohol consumption not only
affects outward behavior but is also associated with
changes in neurophysiological responses to stimuli in the
environment. Differences between alcoholics and controls
have been observed in neurophysiological responses to a
variety of stimuli using a number of event-related
potential paradigms (Pfefferbaum, et al, 1991; Porjesz, et
al, 1998). The mismatch negativity (MMN) component
reflects sensory gating and is thought to indicate a
preparedness to shift attention. MMN has previously
been associated with impulse behavior (Franke, Nijs, Van
Strein, 2005) which is also associated with alcohol
consumption. Alcohol consumption influences MMN
amplitude (Jääskeläinen, et al, 1995; Jääskeläinen, et al,
1996; Jääskeläinen, Schröger, Näätänen, 1999; Kähkönen
& Martiinen, 2005). Chronic alcohol use has been
associated with an increase in MMN amplitude.
However, acute intoxication in non-alcoholics has been
associated with significant suppression of the MMN
amplitude. Though long-term differences in responses are
evident in alcoholic populations who have abused alcohol
for an extended period of time, college binge drinking has
yet to be addressed. Binge drinking is a special
circumstance in which a large amount of alcohol is
consumed in a short period of time. Thus there are
characteristics similar to both long term use as well as
acute intoxication. Additionally, binge drinking is
prevalent in college populations and carries social
pressure. The current study investigated whether college
binge drinkers possess a neurocognitive profile more
similar to chronic alcohol abusers or to other college aged
non drinkers. Further, it sought to examine whether there
are electrophysiological signatures in binge drinkers that
may suggest possible differences in impulsive behavior
and poor executive functioning, as noted in other studies
(Townshend & Duka, 2005). The current study measured
the neural response to a temporal auditory MMN task.
Multiple levels of difficulty were included to manipulate
recruitment of prefrontal cortical areas. General MMN
differences between groups would suggest overall
differences associated with impulsivity, while differences
in response to more difficult conditions may reflect both
issues in impulsivity and PFC mediated tasks. Thirty-five
college students were categorized based on the frequency
and patterns of drinking behavior; binge drinkers (10),
non-binge drinkers (15), and non-drinker (10).
Electrophysiological responses were measured in
response to large (310ms) and small (370ms) auditory
temporal deviant intervals presented amid a string of
standard (400ms) 50 ms 1Hz tones. Results suggested that
the 310ms interval elicited a larger response, F(1,31) =
6.04, p = 0.02. Non-drinkers showed no difference in
MMN amplitude between the two intervals (p = 0.81),
binge drinkers showed a marginally significant difference
(p = 0.06). Interestingly, a marginal significance was
found in the latency of the MMN peaks in response to the
two deviant intervals, F(2, 31) = 2.71, p = 0.08, and binge
drinkers showed a later response than non-binge
drinkers, p = 0.03. While this pattern of results were
somewhat unexpected, the MMN differences noted
between these groups may suggest possible differences
associated with impulsivity and the important role of task

difficulty in distinguishing these groups.
D-61
WHEN AND HOW DOES THE BRAIN PREDICT
HEALTH BEHAVIOR CHANGE? Emily Falk, University
of Pennsylvania; Matthew Brook O'Donnell, University of
Pennsylvania; Christopher Cascio, University of Pennsylvania;
Steve Tompson, University of Michigan; Richard Gonzalez,
University of Michigan; Sonya Dal Cin, University of
Michigan; Matthew Lieberman, University of California, Los
Angeles; Victor Strecher, University of Michigan; Lawrence
An, University of Michigan; - New evidence for self-related
neural predictors of behavior change in response to massmedia health campaigns. We have ample evidence that
neural activity can be used to predict the effectiveness of
health campaigns. We are lacking, however, a clear
understanding of the underlying mechanisms that make
the brain an effective predictor and the limits of this
predictive ability; how and when does the brain predict
health behavior change?
Converging evidence
demonstrates that neural activity within brain systems
associated with self-related processing can predict
individual behavior in response to health messages.
Preliminary evidence also suggests that neural activity in
small groups can forecast population level campaign
outcomes. No studies, however, have investigated the
psychological processes that underpin the link between
neural activity and population level outcomes, or how
these predictions are affected by message content.
Likewise, investigations of ways to manipulate this
activity to achieve better health outcomes have been
extremely limited. In this talk, I will review two new
studies that examine the links between functionally
localized self-related processing and positive responses to
health
communications.
The
first
investigation
demonstrates that neural activity in relatively small
groups of smokers (n=50) predicts population level
responses to an anti-smoking mass-email campaign
(n=800,000). The messages, inspired by FDA's graphic
warning labels, promoted tobacco-cessation services
offered by the state of New York. Data from this study
demonstrate that activity within functionally localized
self-related regions of MPFC during health message
exposure predicts population level email click-throughrates. This relationship, however, depends on message
content-MPFC predicts outcomes in response to strong
negative arguments against smoking and not in response
to compositionally similar neutral images. The second
investigation examines whether it is possible to
manipulate self-related processing in MPFC using selfaffirmation. In this randomized, controlled intervention
study (n=68), sedentary participants exposed to a selfaffirmation manipulation delivered prior to health
messages promoting physical activity significantly
increased their physical activity behavior in the month
following the intervention, whereas the non-affirmed
control group did not. Neural activity in an independent,
functionally localized self-related processing region of
interest within MPFC predicted this outcome. These
results 1) offer support for scalable interventions to
improve population health, 2) provide new insight about
50	  

	  

the underlying psychological and neurocognitive
mechanisms linking neural responses to important health
behavior change outcomes, and 3) suggest important
boundary conditions on prior findings. I will discuss
these results in the context of social neuroscience and
neuroeconomic models of decision-making as a way of
tying together extant findings on decision making with
underlying mechanisms that lead health messages to
succeed or fail. Taken together, this work provides novel
insight about when and how the brain predicts behavior
change on small and large scales.

exhibited stronger activation in ventral striatum, DMPFC,
TPJ, and insula compared to those with less traditional
attitudes in response to sexualized ads (relative both to
control ads and to domestic ads). These results provide
preliminary evidence of a disconnect between explicit and
implicit attitudes toward sexualized portrayals of women
in advertising. In fact, it may be that women with the
most traditional explicit attitudes about gender roles-who
typically report negative attitudes toward sexualized
portrayals-exhibit the most counterintuitive implicit
responses.

D-62
WOMEN'S COGNITIVE RESPONSES TO FEMALETARGETED ADVERTISING Stephanie Vezich, UCLA
Psychology; Ben Gunter, UCLA Psychology; Matthew
Lieberman, UCLA Psychology - Portrayals of women in
advertising generally fall into one of four roles:
aspirational, business, domestic, normal/just like me, or
sexualized. Campaigns focusing on "normal" depictions
of women-those that look like the average woman on the
street-have become more commonplace, largely in
response to self-report feedback from female consumers
who applaud efforts to stray from the narrow range of
models typically used in advertising. While these selfreported attitudes seem to paint a clear picture of
women's preferences in advertising, evidence that this
approach actually drives sales is less clear. To better
understand this potential discrepancy, the current study
investigates both explicit and implicit responses to female
roles in advertising using fMRI. 28 female subjects viewed
120 images of typical female ad portrayals in a
randomized block design, with a different role
comprising each block: 1) aspirational, 2) business, 3)
domestic, 4) normal, 5) sexualized, and 6) control blocks
consisting of car images without people. Within each role
category block, images reflected various product
categories: 1) cars, 2) household items, 3) technology, and
4) control images (images of women without products).
Following presentation of each image, participants rated
how much they liked the image. Additionally, days prior
to their fMRI session, participants completed a survey
assessing their explicit attitudes toward traditional gender
roles. Finally, directly after their fMRI session,
participants were presented with a variety of ads
consisting of different role portrayals and were told to
advance at their own pace, allowing us to see how much
time they spent looking at images in different role
categories. In order to compare self-reported explicit
attitudes and implicit attitudinal measures, we created
two main types of first-level contrasts. One set of
contrasts compared each advertising role (aspirational,
business, etc.) to control car images. Another contrast
directly compared responses to sexualized images to
responses to domestic images, as these roles mapped
most directly onto our self-report measures on attitudes
regarding traditional gender roles. We regressed in
traditional gender role attitude scores at the second level
to investigate whether neural responses to sexualized ads
in particular covaried with explicit attitudes about
traditional gender roles. Whole-brain analyses revealed
that participants with more traditional explicit attitudes

D-63
HOW ANXIETY AND SENTENCE CONTEXT AFFECT
THE
PROCESSING
OF
INSULTS
AND
COMPLIMENTS:
INSIGHTS
FROM
THE
EMOTIONAL STROOP PARADIGM Hannah De Mulder
(UiL OTS - Utrecht University); Marijn Struiksma (UiL OTS
- Utrecht University); Jos van Berkum (UiL OTS - Utrecht
University) - In the emotional Stroop paradigm,
participants are asked to name the colour of a word that is
presented in a coloured font, whilst ignoring its meaning.
The typical finding is that participants are slower to name
the colour of negative words as compared to non-negative
words (McKenna & Sharma, 1995); an effect that is
particularly pronounced in anxious individuals (Williams
et al., 1996). This finding suggests that the emotional
content of words interferes with the allocation of
attentional resources. In the current study, a modified
version of the emotional Stroop task was used to
investigate how participants with high vs. low levels of
state anxiety process complimenting and insulting words.
These words were presented in a sentence context that
was either directed at the participant herself (self-directed
context) or at somebody else (other-directed context), e.g.
'[participant's name]/Linda is nasty/lovely'. The results
showed a typical emotional Stroop effect in that
participants took longer to name the colour of the
insulting words than the complimenting words,
regardless of their anxiety level. This result thus suggests
that insults are so salient that they draw attentional
resources away from goal-directed processing, even if
they are not directed at the participant personally. In
addition to this general slow-down when encountering an
insult, highly anxious participants also showed a slowdown when they were personally addressed in the
stimuli. That is, regardless of whether they were reading
an insult or a compliment, stimuli that addressed the
participant directly were processed more slowly by the
highly anxious participants than by those with lower
anxiety levels. As this difference in response time between
high and low anxious individuals was specific to the selfdirected context (highly anxious individuals were not
significantly slower across the board), it seems that highly
51	  

	  

anxious individuals give attentional priority specifically
to the processing of self-directed stimuli. Together, these
findings thus suggest that in potentially risky situations
(i.e. situations involving insults and, for highly anxious
participants, situations in which they are personally
addressed) attentional resources are diverted away from
the task at hand and towards the potential threat, even if
the potential threat is read in a contrived and highly
'impersonal' lab setting.

	  

	  

52	  

	  

D-64
THE ROLE OF THE MIRROR SYSTEM IN
PROCESSING SEEN AND HEARD EMOTIONAL
ACTION Lucy M. McGarry, Ryerson University, Toronto,
Canada; Frank A. Russo, Ryerson University, Toronto,
Canada; Emily S. Cross, Bangor University, Bangor, Wales When we see or hear another person execute an action,
we tend to automatically simulate the actions of that
person. Evidence for this has been found both at the
neural level (specifically in the parietal and premotor
brain regions, referred to collectively as the mirror system
(MS)), and the behavioural level through an observer’s
tendency to mimic observed movements. It has been
suggested that this simulation process plays a key role in
socio-emotional understanding. Empirical research
supports this premise by demonstrating that the human
MS is activated to a greater extent during observation of
emotional compared neutral body actions. Emotional vs.
neutral vocalizations (perceived via audition) also
facilitate MS responses. However, it remains unclear how
the mirror system responds during auditory compared to
visual perception of emotional vs. neutral non-vocal body
actions. The current fMRI study examines emotional
facilitation of the MS in auditory and visual modalities
using a 2 (Modality: auditory, visual) x 2 (Judgment type:
emotional, non-emotional) factorial design. Participants
viewed a series of emotional or neutral hand actions. In
one condition, they were asked to judge whether the
action they observed or heard was emotional or neutral in
nature. In another condition, they made non-emotion
based judgments of whether the action they just observed
or heard was a unimanual or bimanual action. Stimuli
were presented in auditory-only and visual-only forms.
Planned data analyses involve assessing unimodal effects
of emotional content on perceived actions via main effect
and interaction analyses within the factorial design, and
supramodal effects via conjunction analyses. We predict
that making emotional judgments of stimuli will lead to
similar patterns of MS facilitation in both auditory-only
and visual-only conditions, suggesting that the MS plays
a special role in emotion processing in not only visual but
also auditory modalities. In addition, we expect that
individual differences in empathy scale scores will
correlate positively with MS responses in both modalities.
D-65
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL REASONING
REGARDING ATTITUDES: FALSE CONSENSUS
AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE B. Locke Welborn, UCLA; Eva
H. Telzer, University of Illinois; Matthew D. Lieberman,
UCLA - Adapting to a complex and dynamic social
environment demands effective regulation of the
relationship between our own attitudes and those of the
broader group or community. Using univariate and
multivariate methods in two fMRI studies, we explore the
neural correlates of consensus estimation and social
influence, complementary processes that connect our
attitudes to those of others. In assessing the attitudes of
our peers, consensus estimation helps us understand
when our attitudes may be out of step with those of the
group. In shifting our own attitudes to correspond to
those of our peers, social influence renders our opinions
and judgments malleable to social norms. Using

neuroimaging, we investigate some of the neural
mechanisms involved in these two essential processes.
First, we examine the brain regions whose activity
promotes or inhibits the false consensus effect, the
pervasive tendency to over-estimate support for our own
attitudes (and under-estimate support for those attitudes
which we oppose). In a functional imaging study (n=27),
bilateral amygdala activity demonstrated a strong,
positive relationship with trial-by-trial consensus bias,
suggesting detection and evaluation of the social threat
implied by holding an unusual or atypical view.
Conversely,
participants'
recruitment
of
right
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (RVLPFC) was associated
with the ability to regulate or attenuate bias, so as to bring
consensus estimates in line with the group's actual
attitudes. In a second fMRI study (n=20), we elucidate the
neural mechanisms supporting social influence from
expressed peer attitudes. Mentalizing regions, including
the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), as well as regulatory
regions (RVLPFC) are positively associated with
participants' susceptibility to social influence (mean shift
in one's attitude in the direction of a peer's attitude).
These results may imply that both accurate mental state
reasoning and regulatory inhibition of one's own
prepotent attitudinal position are essential for reorienting
one's attitudes so as to be congruent with those of one's
peers. Taken together, this research illuminates the
neural mechanisms by which our attitudes both 1) impact
our perceptions of the group, and 2) change in response to
the pressure of social influence. It is our hope that a
thorough investigation of such neural underpinnings will
clarify our understanding of these important processes.
D-66
SOCIAL REWARDS PROMOTE SAFE BEHAVIOR:
MATERNAL PRESENCE FACILITATES ADAPTIVE
NEURAL PROCESSING DURING ADOLESCENT
RISK TAKING Eva H. Telzer, Nicholas Ichien, Yang Qu;
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign - In adolescence,
parents tend to adjust their parenting practices to allow
their children to be more independent in their decisionmaking. While decreases in parental supervision are
important for developing autonomy and independence,
adolescents do not always make optimal decisions on
their own and are more likely to engage in risky
behaviors during unsupervised time. Although significant
work has begun to show the protective role of parental
supervision, research examining the mechanisms by
which parents impact adolescents' self-regulation and
associated risk-taking has been surprisingly scant.
Whether parental supervision decreases adolescent risktaking merely by limiting their opportunities to make
poor decisions or whether it actually changes the ways in
which adolescents think and reason can have significant
implications for the development of successful
interventions. In the current study, we examined how
maternal presence influences adolescents' safe and risky
decisions. Twenty-four adolescents were scanned as they
completed a simulated driving course (the Stoplight task;
Gardner & Steinberg, 2005), in which they encountered 26
intersections with a yellow-light and had to decide
whether to "stop" (safe decision) or "go" (risky decision).
Adolescents completed one round of the game alone and
53	  

	  

one round when their mother was present. Run order was
counterbalanced. Results indicate that adolescents made
significantly more safe decisions (i.e., stopped at more
yellow lights) when their mother was present than when
alone. At the neural level, adolescents showed greater
activation in regions involved in cognitive regulation
(VLPFC) when making safe decisions when their mother
was present compared to alone. Following risky
decisions, adolescents showed reduced affective(amygdala) and reward- (ventral striatum) related
activation when their mother was present compared to
alone. Together, these findings suggest that maternal
presence facilitates safe behavior by increasing cognitive
regulation and decreasing the affective nature of risktaking. Secondly, we examined neural coupling between
affective and cognitive control regions that support safe
decisions. Using the ventral striatum as the seed region,
we conducted psychophysiological interaction analyses
(PPI). Results show that the ventral striatum was
significantly positively coupled with the right VLPFC
during decisions to stop when mother was present
compared to alone. In other words, when adolescents
made safe decisions in the presence of their mother, they
showed significant functional coupling between the
ventral striatum and VLPFC; the ventral striatum was not
functionally coupled with the VLPFC when adolescents
were alone. Together, our findings suggest that the social
context can decrease adolescents' risky decision making
by modulating reward- and control-related neural
circuitry. Maternal presence facilitated safe behavior
through bottom-up processing, whereby mothers elicited
a reward-related response (i.e., ventral striatum) that was
associated with increased cognitive control (i.e., VLPFC
activation). That the striatum was functionally coupled
with the VLPFC during safe decisions when adolescents'
mother was present provides evidence that social rewards
promote safe behavior by increasing motivation to engage
in greater cognitive control. Thus, reward-related neural
activation may represent an adaptive process, suggesting
that the very same neural region that confers risk for
adolescent risky decisions may also confer a protective
process by facilitating cognitive control.

54	  

	  

Poster Session H
Saturday, April 12, 4:15-5:30pm
H-01
INCREASED

STRIATAL

ACTIVATION
55	  

	  

IN

RESPONSE TO SYMPATHY-INDUCING STIMULI IN
EXTRAORDINARY ALTRUISTS Brethel-Haurwitz, K.
M. 1, Stoycos, S. A. 1, Cardinale, E. M. 1, Lozier, L. M. 2,
VanMeter, J. 3, & Marsh, A. A. 1; 1Psychology, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC; 2Interdisciplinary Program in
Neuroscience; 3Neurology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC - Altruistic kidney donors
volunteer to undergo surgery so that one of their own
kidneys can be transplanted into a stranger, an act often
described as "extraordinary altruism." The neural basis of
this form of extraordinary altruism is not yet well
understood. In the present study, we recruited altruistic
living kidney donors and healthy matched controls and
compared their neural responses to sympathy-eliciting
and neutral scenarios during functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Scenarios were preceded by
either subliminal neutral or fearful facial expression
primes, following evidence that altruists may be more
sensitive to fearful expressions than controls, and
evidence that, following fearful expression primes,
sensitivity to these expressions predicts sympathy and a
desire to help in the laboratory (Marsh & Ambady, 2007;
Marsh, Kozak, & Ambady, 2007). We also assessed
altruists' ability to recognize emotional facial expressions
in a separate behavioral task. During neuroimaging,
subjects read scenarios depicting protagonists in either
mildly distressing or neutral situations, each of which was
preceded by four backward-masked fearful or neutral
facial expressions, each presented for 27 msec and
followed by a scrambled mask presented for 80 msec.
After reading each scenario, subjects rated how much
sympathy they felt for the protagonist via button press.
During separate behavioral testing after scanning,
subjects explicitly identified facial expressions of anger,
disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise. Brain
imaging data were analyzed using AFNI. We first
computed whole brain contrasts comparing the effects of
fearful versus neutral primes on responses to sympathyinducing scenarios (activation for sympathy-inducing
scenarios preceded by a neutral expression was
subtracted from activation for sympathy-inducing
scenarios preceded by a fearful expression). Results
showed that altruists exhibited increased activation in
several regions implicated in affective decision-making,
including cuneus, cingulate cortex, thalamus, and dorsal
striatum (caudate). Supporting the role of dorsal striatum
in sympathetic responding, we also found that activation
in left caudate in response to sympathy-inducing
scenarios preceded by fearful expressions predicted
increased self-reported sympathy for the protagonists in
these scenarios. In addition, the results of the emotion
recognition task conducted outside the scanner indicated
that altruists recognized fearful expressions more
accurately than did controls, an effect that was specific to
fear, and that recognition of fearful expressions in the
behavioral task predicted activation in the left caudate in
response to sympathy-inducing scenarios preceded by
fearful primes during the imaging task. This association
held within the altruist group, and was also specific to
fear (recognition of other emotions did not predict
caudate activation). Previous research has found the
ability to recognize fearful expressions to be a significant
predictor of sympathy in similar scenarios preceded by a

fearful, but not neutral primes (Marsh & Ambady, 2007).
These results suggest that that, in response to stories of
individuals in distress, extraordinary altruists may
differentially recruit regions involved in reward
processing and motivation while engaging in social
decision-making. This pattern of results in demonstrated
altruists may have important implications for
understanding the roots of prosocial motivation and
behavior, and for understanding the nature of
extraordinary altruism.
H-02 *SANS Poster Award Winner
TEASING APART SOCIAL PERCEPTION AND
EPIGENETIC VARIABILITY WITH MULTIVARIATE
PATTERN ANALYSES Tyler Santander, Jessica J. Connelly,
& James P. Morris (University of Virginia) - Social
perception is a complex phenomenon that lies at the heart
of all interpersonal interactions-it allows us to infer the
thoughts, goals, and beliefs of others; it can promote
affiliative behaviors between individuals; and it can
ameliorate feelings of isolation and emotional stress.
Unlike many other critical aspects of cognition (e.g.
memory), successful social perception is often exceedingly
effortless, and the advent of noninvasive imaging
technologies has now allowed us to begin teasing apart
the neural mechanisms that support these behaviors.
Toward that end, we employed functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) in an effort to further
distinguish between brain systems supporting various
facets of social perception. Participants completed three
tasks: 1) perception of animacy; 2) perception of biological
motion; and 3) perception of emotional faces. Support
vector machine (SVM) multivariate pattern classification
was then used to probe the processing of social versus
nonsocial information across the whole brain. The key
strength of a multivariate approach such as SVM is that it
is sensitive to spatially-distributed patterns of activation
that may not be otherwise distinguishable by mean signal
(cf. mass-univariate analyses). Here, classifiers for each
task were trained to distinguish between experimental
conditions and were tested using an iterative leave-onesubject-per-class-out procedure. Predictive performance
was subsequently assessed using an iterative
nonparametric permutation test. Across each task, the
classifiers were able to significantly discriminate between
social and nonsocial processes (balanced accuracies, BAC,
all > 80%). While the most discriminative voxels appeared
to overlap with areas commonly reported in univariate
analyses, there appears to be behaviorally-relevant
information across wide swaths of voxels that typically
are not discriminable by mean signal. Moreover, a
classifier was able to significantly discriminate between
perception of animacy and perception of biological
motion (BAC = 93.4%), even though peak voxels in
univariate analyses demonstrate considerable overlap.
Together, these results suggest that multivariate analyses
may be an overall more sensitive method for investigating
the neural mechanisms that support social perception.
Future directions involve additional pattern recognition
methods to determine how genetic factors thought to
underlie social behavior may be predicted from
distributed patterns of activity within an individual's
56	  

	  

neural endophenotype. Preliminary findings using
relevance vector regression (a sparse Bayesian learning
technique for multivariate pattern recognition) indicate
that whole brain patterns of activity for emotional face
perception are significantly predictive of inter-individual
variability in DNA methylation on the oxytocin receptor
gene (OXTR). Given that the oxytocin system is wellknown to mediate various aspects of social behavior,
these results are a promising first step towards decoding
individual differences at the level of genetics from fMRI
data.
H-03

learning behavior (i.e., "I rarely change my mind about
people") recruited left vlPFC more strongly than those
who reported more tolerant learning behavior. However,
we observed a positive correlation between left vlPFC
activity during updating based on moral behavior and
endorsement of flexible attitudes regarding personality
(i.e., "I believe that people can change"), such participants
who endorsed more flexible attitudes recruited left vlPFC
more strongly than those who endorsed more fixed
attitudes regarding personality. Taken together, these
results suggest that real-world differences in updating
behavior predict differential activation of regions
implicated in updating impressions.

NEURAL
DISSOCIATIONS
BETWEEN
MEANINGFUL AND MERE INCONSISTENCIES
DURING IMPRESSION UPDATING Peter MendeSiedlecki (Princeton University) and Alex Todorov (Princeton
University) - Recent work has attempted to characterize
the neural bases of updating impressions of other people
based on their behavior. Across two previous studies, we
have identified a substantial network of regions-including
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex (vlPFC), superior temporal sulcus (STS),
and temporoparietal junction (TPJ)-which respond
preferentially to new information that runs contrary with
initial impressions (Mende-Siedlecki, et al., 2013; MendeSiedlecki, et al., in press). However, it remains unclear
whether this activity reflects meaningful changes in
impressions in response to attributionally relevant
content, or surprise in response to mere inconsistency. We
devised an fMRI experiment designed to address this gap
in knowledge. Participants learned five consecutive pieces
of behavioral information about a series of individuals.
For each individual, the content of information on Trials 4
and 5 was inconsistent with the information presented on
Trials 1 through 3. Critically, half of these individuals
were "meaningfully" inconsistent (with behavior
switching in character from either moral to immoral or
immoral to moral), while the other half were "merely"
inconsistent (with behaviors switching in a surprising, but
not trait-relevant manner-for example, an individual
previously described as going to bed at 6 P.M. in the
evening suddenly going to bed at 3 A.M. in the morning).
Left vlPFC and left STS responded preferentially to
"meaningful" inconsistency-specifically when behaviors
changed in character from moral to immoral, consistent
with our prior work. However, bilateral TPJ responded
preferentially when behavior changed in a "merely"
inconsistent fashion. Within the context of impression
updating, these results are potentially suggestive of a
dissociation between regions involved in revising person
representations in memory (vlPFC, STS) and regions
involved in processing intentionality (TPJ). In addition,
we combined across the present study and our two
previous investigations of impression updating and
assessed the degree to which activity associated with
"meaningful" updating co-varies with self-reported
behavioral tendencies and attitudes, vis-ẚ-vis impression
formation. We observed a negative correlation between
left vlPFC activity during updating based on immoral
behavior and the tolerance of self-reported learning
behavior, such that participants who reported more rigid

H-04
DNA METHYLATION AND GENETIC VARIATION
INTERACT AT THE OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR TO
MODULATE BRAIN ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH
PERCEPTION OF EMOTIONAL FACE EXPRESSIONS
Meghan H. Puglia, Department of Psychology, University of
Virginia; Allison Jack, Child Study Center, Yale University;
Jessica Connelly, School of Medicine, University of Virginia;
and James P. Morris, Department of Psychology, University of
Virginia - Social functioning is dependent upon cognitive
and perceptual processes that are necessary for a range of
skills, from identifying and reacting to social cues, to
establishing and maintaining relationships. These abilities
are highly variable across individuals, with some
navigating the social world with ease, while others
struggle or simply cannot build or maintain social
relationships, seen in disorders such as the autism
spectrum (ASD). Underlying this variability is a
combination of genetic, epigenetic and neurobiological
factors that give rise to complex social behavior. The
research we describe here examines variability in brain
activity as a potential endophenotype linking genetic and
epigenetic variation to social behavioral differences. Prior
work from our group established that differences in the
level of DNA methylation at the oxytocin receptor locus
(OXTR) in human typicals predict neural response during
social perception. DNA methylation is an epigenetic
modification that can result in changes in gene function
through changes in gene expression. Here we investigate
variability in level of DNA methylation of OXTR in the
context of differing genetic background to determine how
these genome differences may interact to impact neural
systems supporting social behavior. We hypothesized that
the effect of OXTR methylation on neural activity during
a face perception task would differ depending on the
genotype of a common polymorphism (rs53576) known to
differentiate typical response to social stimuli. To test this
hypothesis, 67 neurotypical volunteers submitted blood
samples and were scanned while performing a common
emotional face-matching task. DNA from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells was bisulfite treated and
pyrosequenced, and genotype and percent DNA
methylation of our candidate site within OXTR was
assessed. Whole-brain analysis revealed that DNA
methylation differentially moderates brain response
depending on OXTR genotype. Higher degrees of
methylation for carriers of a risk allele predicted
diminished response within bilateral dorsal anterior
57	  

	  

cingulate, while the opposite was true of individuals who
do not carry the risk allele. Future work will determine
the impact of this novel genetic-epigenetic interaction on
behavioral phenotype, potentially highlight the
mechanism of its action, and help to further characterize
typical and atypical social phenotypes. We suggests that
this variability at the genetic and neural level will be
predictive of overt behavioral variability.
H-05
TRAINING
AND
PREDICTING
CHARITABLE
DONATION:
PSYCHOLOGICAL
AND
PRELIMINARY NEURAL MECHANISMS Yoni K.
Ashar, Jessica R. Andrews-Hanna, Tal Yarkoni, Jenifer Sills,
Sona Dimidjian, Tor D. Wager; University of Colorado,
Boulder - Prosocial behavior is critical to a wellfunctioning society. Here, we describe translational
research linking specific psychological motivators of
prosocial behavior, operationalized as charitable
donation, with a compassion-training intervention acting
through those pathways. In Study 1, we used statistical
learning to develop a model quantitatively predicting
charitable donation from 8 emotions and attributions
regarding the potential recipient. The model explained
42% of the variance in donation amounts. In Study 2, we
compared a Compassion Meditation (CM) intervention to
two active control conditions: a) a placebo Oxytocin
spray, controlling for expectations of increased
compassion and demand characteristics, and b) a
familiarity training group. CM led to increased charitable
donation relative to combined controls, and the model of
emotions and attributions developed in Study 1 mediated
this effect. We will additionally present preliminary
analyses on the neural correlates of donation and on the
effect of CM on brain function. We conclude that a
translational approach integrating interventions with
their underlying psychological and neural mechanisms
holds promise for advancing our knowledge of prosocial
motivation, behavior, and training.

H-06
PHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES TO FEEDBACK
DIFFERENTIATE
SOCIAL
AND
MONETARY
REWARDS Victoria K. Lee1, Chaydaa R. Mohammed2, &
Lasana T. Harris1,2; 1Department of Psychology &
Neuroscience; 2Institute of Brain Sciences - Growing
evidence suggests social and monetary reward processing
are similar-social rewards (e.g. being labeled trustworthy,
donating money to charity in the presence of others, and
viewing smiling faces) engage brain regions that are also
engaged for monetary reward (Izuma et al., 2008; 2010;
Lin et al., 2012). However, social rewards are often
preferred to nonsocial rewards, suggesting behaviorally
these two types of reward are not the same. This
disconnect may result from the simplified social context
that can often result when studying social processes in the
lab (Zaki & Ochsner, 2009). Here we study reactions to

social and monetary reward using a truly social rewardgroup membership in an esteemed social group. Using
facial EMG, we measure reactions to positive and
negative feedback in the zygomaticus major, orbicular
oculi, and corrugator supercili muscles when receiving
positive or negative social or monetary feedback.
Participants were asked to decide which of three abstract
paintings is most expensive in the money condition or is
preferred by members of an esteemed social group,
MENSA, in the social condition. Correct responses in the
money condition implied the participant has a good eye
for art and resulted in bonus money awarded at the end
of the experiment. Correct responses in the social
condition implied the participant had similar preferences
as MENSA members, and perhaps deserving of
membership in the group themselves. We observed
valence dependent differences for the social and
monetary conditions in the zygomaticus and corrugator
muscles. These results suggest reactions to social and
monetary reward differ and highlight the importance of
the social context in studying reward.
H-07
PERIPHERAL OXYTOCIN PREDICTS INDIVIDUAL
VARIABILITY IN PERCEPTION OF ANIMACY Katie
Lancaster1, C. Sue Carter2, Hossein P. Nazarloo2, Allison
Jack3, Jessica Connelly4, and James P. Morris1; 1Department
of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA;
2Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC; 3Child Study Center, Yale University, New
Haven, CT; 4Department of Medicine, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA - Social perception is key to all human
interaction; however, the neurobiology supporting social
perceptual processes is poorly understood. One
neuropeptide in particular- oxytocin-has generated
significant recent interest due to its role in bonding and
affiliative processes in mammals. Oxytocin has also been
shown to influence perception in a prosocial manner
when
administered
intranasally;
however,
the
relationship between endogenous oxytocin and
perception remains unknown. Accordingly, we sought to
examine whether individual differences in peripheral
(plasma) oxytocin could account for variability in neural
activity underlying social perception. In the current
study, we assessed fMRI BOLD response to perceptions of
animacy of anthropomorphized shapes. Thirty-seven
male participants underwent scanning and provided a
blood sample for hormonal analysis. Across all
participants, perception of animacy generated robust
activations in superior temporal sulcus extending into
lateral occipital cortex, inferior frontal gyrus, and medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Further, individual levels of
peripheral oxytocin were significantly related to
activation in areas of medial temporal gyrus, lateral
occipital cortex, middle frontal gyrus, ventral mPFC and
dorsal mPFC. Together these results suggest that
peripheral oxytocin may be an important contributor to
the neurobiological basis of social perception.
H-08
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC CORRELATES OF
58	  

	  

EMPATHIC ACCURACY Brett Velez, Northern Arizona
University; Brandon Nelson, Northern Arizona University;
Kimberly Anderson, Northern Arizona University; Chad
Woodruff, Northern Arizona University - Research using
neuroimaging techniques propose that the human mirror
neuron system (hMNS) plays a role in empathic
processing.
Mu-suppression
using
electroencephalography (EEG) is suggested to be the
activation of mirror neurons in the sensorimotor cortices.
Previous work also shows that the ability to discriminate
the self from other is critical in the role of empathizing
with another person. Functional MRI results of empathic
accuracy experiments suggest the hMNS may play a role
in empathic processes (Zaki, Bolger, Oschner, 2008). The
current experiment adapts the paradigm used by Zaki
and seeks to support and extend the results with a
different neuroimaging measure, EEG. We predict to see a
relationship between self-other discrimination and
empathic accuracy along with emotional expressivity,
perspective-taking abilities, and affective empathy.
Similar to Zaki's earlier research, preliminary results
show a relationship between the targets' emotional
expressivity and the perceivers' accuracy ratings.
H-09
PERCEIVED
WARMTH
AFFECTS
SOCIAL
COGNITION DURING GAME PLAY R. McKell
Carter(1,2*), Micah Johnson (2), Sarah Danehower (2), and
Michele T. Diaz (2); 1 - Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke
University; 2 - Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke
University; *Correspondence at: mckell.carter@gmail.com Whether or not someone considers another person's
thoughts and feelings depends on how they relate to
them. Warmth is one particularly important dimension of
personality that determines how we relate to other
individuals. Previous work has shown that people are
more likely to consider the thoughts and feelings of
another person if they perceive that individual as warm.
Here we seek to extend that work to a competitive
domain by showing that creating a view of another as
either warm or cold changes the extent to which we
consider their mental processes. We also hypothesize that
brain regions underlying these interactions, like the
temporal parietal junction, will be modulated by the
perceived warmth of the opponent. We asked participants
to play a simplified poker game during function magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) against two opponents,
characterized as either a warm or cold person by
statements that appear below their picture. We used
combinatorial pattern classification techniques to identify
portions of the brain that differentiated bluffing from
folding, contrasting patterns of activation elicited by the
warm and cold opponents. Participants bluffed a
significant portion of the time against both opponents.
Regions of the brain thought to be involved modeling
others mental processes predicted bluffing, including the
medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices as well as a
region in the temporal parietal junction. Combinatorial
analysis shows that these regions did not equally
contribute to bluffing. The perceived warmth of the
opponent also modulated bluff prediction. The perceived
warmth of the opponent modulated competitive

interaction and the engagement of social cognitive regions
of the brain. This work was supported by NIMH R01070685, NIA R01-034138 and by NINDS P01-41328.
H-10
DIFFERENCES
IN
THE
EARLY
VISUAL
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSE TO FACES
DURING TRUST APPRAISALS IN HIGH VS. LOW
BPD-TRAIT GROUPS Bibi, R.*,**, Melara, R.*,**, Sullivan,
K.**, Mitchell, P.*, Shevorykin, A.**, Skiba, R.**, John, G.**,
Kodra, A.**, Edelman, J.*,**, & Fertuck, E.*,**; * The Graduate
Center, CUNY; ** The City College of New York, CUNY- As a
fundamental emotional stimulus, facial expression
conveys important information in social exchange.
Individuals who suffer with Borderline Personality
Disorder (BPD) have shown difficulty interpreting
emotions in speeded tasks (Dyck et al., 2009). They are
also more likely to be biased to interpret neutral faces as
negative and exhibit longer response times to ambiguous
faces (Fertuck, Grinband, & Stanley, 2013). The present
study investigates the neural substrates underlying
negative biasing and difficulties in interpreting facial trait
expressions in individuals with BPD features using eventrelated potentials (ERPs). A novel EEG paradigm we
developed for trait appraisal research that incorporates
implicit social learning of trust was employed. The
paradigm includes trait appraisals to faces parametrically
varied along a trust dimension before and after learning
ambiguous, negative, positive, and mixture of positive
and negative traits associated with a particular Identity
(face). We used this paradigm to compare trust appraisals
in a non-clinical sample of undergraduate students
grouped with "high BPD traits" (n=10,PAI-BPD M= 38.4,
SD =3.9) vs. "low BPD traits' (n=9, PAI-BPD M=12.3, SD
=8.1). The high BPD trait group exhibited a response bias
to rate the untrustworthiness of facial stimuli higher,
F(1,17) = 8.1, p<. 01 compared to the low BPD trait group.
We found ERP evidence for differences in early cortical
visual perception in the high vs. low BPD trait groups. In
line with previous studies that show subtle deficits in
visual perception might be related to impairment in
interpersonal communication and negative biases in BPD.
H-11
THE IMPACT OF CHILDHOOD EXPERIENCE ON
AMYGDALA RESPONSES TO PERCEPTUALLY
FAMILIAR BLACK AND WHITE FACES Tianyi Li,
University of Chicago;; Jasmin Cloutier, University of
Chicago;; Joshua Correll, University of Colorado Boulder.Given the well-documented involvement of the amygdala
on race perception (Kubota et al., 2012), the current study
aimed to investigate how interracial contact during
childhood shapes amygdala responses to racial out-group
members in adulthood. Given the dearth of research
directly examining the impact of familiarity on race
perception, the current study also aims to directly explore
the role of perceptual familiarity. Of particular interest
was the impact of childhood experience on responses to
perceptually familiar, compared to novel, Black faces.
More generally, the current study has the potential to
inform how perceiving others in terms of unique
59	  

	  

characteristics (i.e., differentiating individuals based on
idiosyncratic features beyond those associated with a
particular social category) may contribute to effective
prejudice reduction. White participants between the ages
of 19 and 34 years (N=45; Mean Age=24.2 years; 24
female) went through an individuation task that
familiarized them with 10 Black and 10 White faces (see
Lebrecht et al., 2009). Participants took part in an eventrelated fMRI session while viewing forty unique faces (10
familiar Black, 10 familiar White, 10 novel Black, and 10
novel White). Consistent with the long-standing idea that
individuation, rather than categorically construing
individuals based on their social group of belonging,
minimizes prejudice (Brewer, 1988; Fiske and Neuberg,
1990), the obtained results suggest that perceptual
familiarity diminishes amygdala activity when perceiving
Black faces. More interestingly, this reduction in
amygdala responses to familiar Black faces is magnified
by childhood interracial contact. Specifically, controlling
for a number of well-established individual difference
measures related to interracial attitudes (e.g., implicit and
explicit prejudice, internal and external motivation to
respond without prejudice, etc.), White perceivers with
more childhood exposure to racial out-group members
(i.e., Black adults and peers) display greater relative
reduction in amygdala responses to familiar Black faces,
as compared to novel Black faces. Notably, including the
extensive measures of racial attitudes as covariates in the
model, the association between interracial contact and
reduced amygdala responses to familiar Black faces
cannot easily be accounted for by attitudes or
motivational processes. A similar pattern is not found for
White faces. These results suggest that interracial contact
during childhood enhances the efficiency of perceptual
familiarity training in prejudice reduction. The
implications of such findings are discussed in the context
of previous investigations into the neural substrates of
race perception and in consideration of potential
mechanisms by which childhood experience may shape
race perception. Nonetheless, being the first study
attempting to examine the impact of childhood experience
on race perception in adulthood, further investigations
are required to understand how childhood exposure and
familiarity interact during race perception.
H-12
FORMING IMPRESSIONS OF OTHERS VARYING
ON FINANCIAL AND MORAL STATUS Ivo Gyurovski
(University of Chicago); Jasmin Cloutier (University of
Chicago)- Status-based Person Evaluation
Social
hierarchies are the basis of many non-human and human
societies. Asymmetries in social status typically underlie
these hierarchies and individuals with higher social status
have been suggested to elicit positive evaluations from
conspecifics (Fiske 2010; Magee & Galinsky, 2008).
Following up on our previous findings suggesting that
the human ventromedial prefrontal cortex [VMPFC] is
preferentially recruited when forming impressions of
targets with vocational occupations indicative of high
moral status (Cloutier et al., 2012), we were interested to
further examine how distinct dimensions of social status
impact the neural substrates of person perception.

Existing evidence suggests that while wealth may confer
high status, it can also lead to negative evaluations (Fiske
et al., 2002; Ribstein, 2009). In contrast, high moral status,
which habitually confers respect (Boehm, 2012; Yzerbyt &
Demoulin, 2010), consistently leads to positive
evaluations. Thus, the current study was designed to
further test the hypothesis that evaluative responses to
targets varying in social status are dependent upon the
social dimensions along which status is inferred (Cloutier
et al., 2012). To do so, we focused on VMPFC activity
during impression formation of individuals varying on
distinct dimensions of social status. In an fMRI
experiment, participants were presented with faces
associated with either a low, average, or high financial
status, or a low, average, or high moral status.
Participants were asked to form an impression of each
target, but were not instructed to explicitly evaluate them
based on their social status. The obtained results indicate
greater VMPFC activity to targets with higher compared
to lower moral status and greater response to targets with
lower compared to higher financial status. Given that the
VMPFC has been previously implicated in person
evaluation and the generation of affective meaning
(Mende-Siedlecki, Said, & Todorov, 2013; Roy, Shohamy,
& Wager, 2012), such findings further suggest that high
status does not necessarily lead to positive evaluations
and that the dimension from which status is inferred
influences how perceivers evaluate others (Cloutier et al.,
2012). The implications of these results are discussed
with an emphasis towards better understanding the
impact of social status on social cognition and uncovering
the neural substrates of person evaluation. In conjunction
with additional research on the topic (Chiao et al., 2009;
Cloutier & Gyurovski, 2013; Yamakawa et al., 2009), these
findings suggest the existence of a possible network of
brain regions (including the IPS) involved in assessing the
relative positions of conspecifics varying in social status.
H-13
AMYGDALA
ACTIVATION
DURING
SYMPATHIZING AS A FUNCTION OF CALLOUSUNEMOTIONAL TRAITS Elise M. Cardinale, Leah M.
Lozier, Sarah A. Stoycos, Abigail A. Marsh; Georgetown
University - Callous-unemotional (CU) traits represent the
emotional and interpersonal traits characteristic of adult
psychopathy including lack of guilt, shallow affect, lack of
concern for the wellbeing of others and deficits in
responding to fear-related stimuli. Research examining
the neural correlates of CU traits has consistently found
evidence for amygdala hypoactivity in response to
emotionally evocative stimuli such as fearful facial
expressions. Until recently, studies have conflated the
effects of conduct problems and CU traits. Recent
evidence suggests that callous-unemotional traits may
moderate the relationship between conduct problems and
amygdala activity with high CU traits and conduct
problems resulting in hypoactivation while low CU traits
and conduct problems result in hyperactivation of the
amygdala in response to fearful expressions. The present
study examined the effects of subliminal fear priming on
sympathizing in children, ages 10-17, with varying
60	  

	  

degrees of externalizing conduct problems and CU traits
as assessed by the Inventory of Callous and Unemotional
Traits (ICU). Previous research has found that priming
individuals with fearful facial expressions increases
sympathy for others. We aimed to examine whether this
same effect could be observed in adolescence with
behavior problems and varying degrees of CU traits and
if differences in sensitivity to fear primes as well as
differences in underlying neural correlates predict
sympathizing or aggressive behavior. Each participant
completed an fMRI scan during which they read scenarios
describing characters in either distressing or neutral
scenarios. Before each scenario, participants were
subliminally primed with either fearful or neutral faces.
Participants were instructed to indicate how much
sympathy they felt for the character described in each. We
found that children with conduct problems and high
levels of CU traits showed amygdala hypoactivity during
sympathizing when primed with fear facial expressions
while children with conduct problems but low CU traits
showed amygdala hyperactivity in comparison to
controls. Furthermore, amygdala activity was negatively
associated with self-reported proactive aggression,
aggression for the sake of achieving a goal, but not
reactive aggression, aggression in response to threat or
provocation. We also found that the Uncaring subscale of
the ICU was strongly predictive of amygdala activity,
while neither the Unemotional nor Callous subscales
were. Additionally, children with low CU traits and
conduct problems responded with the highest levels of
sympathy for the character when primed with fear
expressions. Other significant brain regions that were
revealed through an interaction between group and
condition in a whole brain analysis were the inferior
parietal lobule, cingulate gyrus, precuneus and middle
frontal gyrus. These findings indicate that in a sample of
adolescents with serious conduct problems, CU traits are
associated with amygdala activity during sympathizing
following fear priming supporting the link between CU
traits, fear processing deficits and amygdala hypoactivity.
Amygdala hyperactivation and increased sympathizing
following fear priming in children with conduct problems
and low CU traits indicate a possible area for behavioral
rehabilitation. Furthermore, our findings suggest that
hypoactivity of the amygdala during sympathizing is
predictive of increased instrumental aggression in
adolescence.
H-14
THE NEURAL ORGANIZATION OF PERSON
KNOWLEDGE Mark A. Thornton, Harvard University;
Jason P. Mitchell, Harvard University - Understanding the
enduring characteristics of individual people plays a
crucial role in human social life. Social and personality
psychology have suggested several dimensions along
which knowledge about others might be organized.
These include basic social categories, personality,
egocentrism, relationships, and stereotyping. However,
do real-world perceivers actually use all of these
dimensions to characterize others? The current study
employed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
and multivoxel pattern analysis to discover whether and

where different types of person knowledge are
represented in the brain. Participants first provided a list
of 40 people who they knew personally and rated each
person on 16 scales falling into the five models of the
social world described above. Basic social categories
included age, race, and sex; personality was assessed on
the Big Five dimensions; egocentrism was measured in
terms of similarity, familiarity, and liking; relationships
types were based on relational models theory constructs
of equity, sharing and authority; and stereotypes were
measured on warmth and competence, the dimensions of
the stereotype content model; and similarity was
measured on the basis of a behavioral task in which
participants indicated which of two targets was more
similar to a third. A subset of 20 people was selected by
an algorithm designed to maximize interpersonal
variance across all five models. Finally, during fMRI
scanning participants engaged in an episodic simulation
task in which they imagined each of the 20 people in six
common scenarios (e.g. buying groceries). Patterns of
brain activity corresponding to each of the people were
generated using the general linear model. A searchlight
analysis was used to generate neural similarity matrices
between people for each voxel in the brain. These
similarity matrices were then compared to matrices based
on the aggregate theoretical models described above and
their individual dimensions. A wide array of brain
regions were associated with individual dimensions,
suggesting that different dimensions of person
knowledge are indeed coded throughout the brains of
perceivers.
H-15
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
ESCAPE/AVOIDANCE BEHAVIOR IN HUMANS:
EMPIRICAL FINDINGS AND A COMPUTATIONAL
MODEL J. Sheynin 1,2,3, K.D. Beck 1,2,3, K.C.H. Pang
1,2,3, R.J. Servatius 1,2,3, C.E. Myers 2,3; 1 Joint Biomedical
Engineering Program, New Jersey Institute of Technology and
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Newark, NJ; 2 Department of
Veterans Affairs, VA New Jersey Health Care System, East
Orange, NJ; 3 Stress & Motivated Behavior Institute,
Department of Neurology and Neurosciences, New Jersey
Medical School, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
Newark, NJ - Normally, avoidance behavior is an adaptive
behavior, which can protect individuals from aversive
events. However, exaggerated avoidance can be
detrimental and can result in the development of
psychopathologies such as anxiety disorders. Crucially,
individual differences, including those associated with
anxiety vulnerability, might affect individuals' propensity
to acquire and express avoidance behavior. In the present
project, we evaluated the relationship between personal
characteristics and avoidance learning in undergraduate
students. In the first study, students (N=102) were tested
on a computer-based task in which they could learn to
escape or avoid an on-screen aversive event. Warning
signals that were predictive of the aversive events, as well
as other non-threat signals were included. Subjects were
also given the Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire
(TPQ), which assesses several aspects of personality, and
includes an assessment of harm avoidance (HA), a
61	  

	  

tendency to respond intensely to signals of aversive
stimuli. Results demonstrated that HA was associated
with higher rates of avoidance responses (AR) in the
current paradigm. Furthermore, while males and females
avoided at the same rate, females showed longer AR
durations. In a second study, we tested whether
manipulating the saliency of the non-threat signal, would
affect escape-avoidance acquisition. Students were
randomly assigned to a testing condition with or without
a salient non-threat signal (n=61 per group). Results
showed that while the addition of a salient non-threat
signal eliminated the sex difference on AR durations, it is
only the condition with the non-threat signal that showed
HA differences on AR rates. Taken together, findings
suggest that sex differences on AR durations are sensitive
to the saliency of non-threat signals (and disappear when
saliency is high), while HA differences on AR rates are
dependent on the presence of non-threat signals
(regardless of saliency). These results were further
investigated using a reinforcement learning model with
an actor-critic architecture. Several model parameters
(e.g., exploration/exploitation tendencies) were found to
potentially account for the described empirical data.
Overall, this work sheds light on the mechanisms
underlying avoidance behavior in humans, which in turn
may suggest new methods to facilitate the prevention,
diagnosis and treatment of pathological avoidance.

H-16
HEURISTIC DECISION MAKING: A MEMORYBASED
PROCESS
MODEL
INCORPORATING
RECOGNITION AND FLUENCY Shane R. Schwikert, Tim
Curran; University of Colorado-Boulder - Simple heuristics
have been shown to facilitate the interplay between
memory and judgment processes by exploiting
fundamental cognitive abilities. The recognition heuristic
states that, when choosing between a recognized item and
an unrecognized item, choose the recognized item.
Relatedly, the fluency heuristic states that when two items
are recognized; choose the item that is recognized more
quickly (retrieved more fluently). Both these heuristics are
prime examples of shortcuts that make the most of an
automatic by-product of retrieval from memory in order
to make quick decisions. In an initial experiment, we used
a modified city-size and country-size comparison task
(known collectively as 'regions') while recording eventrelated potentials (ERPs) to investigate the potential
contributions of familiarity and recollection to the two
heuristics. ERPs were markedly different for recognition
heuristic-based decisions and fluency heuristic-based
decisions, suggesting a distinct role for familiarity in the
recognition heuristic and a distinct role for recollection in
the fluency heuristic. In a follow-up behavioral
experiment, we coupled a remember-know procedure
with a region-size comparison task to obtain more
accurate measures of perceived memory for each region
in the task. Although current literature suggests the
fluency heuristic relies on retrieval fluency (recognition
speed) in isolation, our results suggested retrieval fluency
is confounded with recollection of further information.
Furthermore, multi-level modeling suggested that both

sources of information contribute differentially to fluency
heuristic-based decisions. We conclude that there is no
need for the two separate heuristics as they are
traditionally defined, and instead an all-encompassing
heuristic based on perceived memory differences between
two items would be more practical. By our theory, when
two items differ greatly in their perceived memory (an
unknown item vs. a well-remembered item) individuals
can utilize an early and more coarse familiarity signal to
make a decision. Conversely, when two items are similar
in their perceived memory, familiarity differences are not
robust enough to make a reliable decision, and
individuals must resort to more effortful recollection
processes in order to make a decision.
H-17
THE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF FREEZE AND THE
FREEZE-FIGHT TRANSITION Thomas Gladwin, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Nijmegen.; Vanessa van Ast, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University
Nijmegen.; Mahur Hashemi, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen.;
Erno Hermans, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen.; Karin Roelofs,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University Nijmegen.; - When confronted with a
threat, humans and other animals may show a cluster of
behavioral and physiological changes termed freeze.
Freeze is associated with immobility and parasympathetic
activation, expressed for instance as heart rate
deceleration and a reduction in body sway. However,
underlying this immobility is an attentive, prepared
readiness to execute fight or flight responses. Relatively
few investigations of the neural mechanisms of freeze
have been performed in humans. An important first study
used a passive viewing paradigm to demonstrate the
involvement
of
amygdala-periaqueductal
gray
connectivity in threat-related heart rate deceleration. We
aim to build on this work, first, by controlling the ability
to actively prepare to avoid threat. We expect that freeze
will be found most strongly in the active condition,
compared to a helpless state of threat anticipation.
Second, we aim to study the transition from freeze to the
execution of a fight response. To these aims, we
developed a Freeze-Fight task in which subjects were
confronted with risky versus safe opponents, and in
which they were armed or unarmed. Both types of
opponent could draw a gun and attempt to shoot the
subject, or take out a mobile phone. If the subject was
armed, they could attempt to shoot the opponent after he
had drawn a gun. With risky opponents, being shot in the
game was associated with an actual aversive stimulus
(electric shock). The task was performed during fMRI
scanning. We will present results concerning the effects of
the task conditions on freeze, and on the neural activity
and connectivity associated with freezing and the freeze
to fight transition.
H-18

*SANS Poster Award Winner

SOCIAL

NETWORKS

AND

SOCIAL

SHARING:
62	  

	  

NEURAL, LINGUISTIC AND ONLINE SOCIAL
NETWORK MEASURES HELP US UNDERSTAND
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND
INFORMATION DIFFUSION Matthew Brook O'Donnell
(University of Pennsylvania); Chris Cascio (University of
Pennsylvania); Joe Bayer (University of Michigan); Emily B.
Falk (University of Pennsylvania) - What makes people
want to share particular ideas? What makes some people
more effective at persuading others about an idea and
thereby contributes to the broader propagation of the
idea? How does the broader social environment affect
how people make recommendations? The new media
environment has increased our daily exposure to novel
ideas and provided greater opportunities for sharing
these ideas with others. It has also offered unprecedented
access to a written record of social network ties and
linguistic patterns of sharing that can now be leveraged to
understand the social and psychological processes
involved in making recommendations and successful idea
propagation. In this talk, we describe results from a series
of studies that illustrate how computational tools from
social network analysis and linguistics can complement
neural measures in answering core questions in social and
affective neuroscience and psychology. Social network
analysis (SNA) provides measures for quantifying the
social and psychological components of individuals'
broader social environments (e.g., their connections to
others and opportunities to exert social influence). As one
example of how SNA can complement neuroscience data,
we examined how social network position (the extent to
which an individual is a hub in their social network)
relates to neural processes involved in making effective
recommendations. Using 54 ego-networks scraped from
adolescent male Facebook users' online accounts we
quantified the extent to which they serve to connect the
groups of friends in their network. In this study, teens
who connect more different groups of friends show
increased activity in the mentalizing system when making
recommendations and receiving social feedback about
their recommendations. The mentalizing system is also
associated with successful message propagation and
being a good "idea salesperson". Taken together, these
results suggest one possible pathway through which
social position produces and/or is produced by
interactions at the individual level. To further understand
the content of these interaction, we turn to computational
linguistics. As examples, we made use of two kinds of
quantitative linguistic analysis, 1. categorical word counts
(i.e., Pennebaker's LWIC) and 2. supervised machine
learning sentiment analysis. We found that exposure to
ideas containing more social words produced greater
activity in mentalizing regions, specifically the right
temporal parietal junction (rTPJ), during initial exposure.
Next, neural activity extracted from a functional ROI
network including rTPJ, MPFC and PC/PCC, predicted
(using a multilevel logistic regression) the type of
language that participants subsequently used to describe
stimuli. More specifically, increased activity in these
regions was associated with using more positive
language, as classified by the automatic sentiment
analysis of the language produced by subjects describing
and recommending the stimuli. Taken together, these
results suggest linguistic pathways that may link initial

neural activity associated with being a good idea
salesperson to actually bringing another person on board
with one's preferred ideas.
In this talk, new insights
regarding the psychological and neurocognitive
mechanisms of social influence will be used to illustrate
the broader opportunities that these methods afford to the
field.
H-19
FREEZING AND VISUAL PERCEPTION Maria
Lojowska1,2, Thomas Gladwin1,2, Erno Hermans2,3, Karin
Roelofs1,2; Maria Lojowska(1,2), Thomas Gladwin(1,2), Erno
Hermans (2,3), Karin Roelofs (1,2); (1)Behavioural Science
Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands ;
(2)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, The
Netherlands; (3)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
The Netherlands- On encountering a threat, humans tend
to show an evolutionarily preserved freeze reaction
characterized by immobility and heart rate deceleration.
Freezing has been conceptually framed as a mechanism to
prevent from being spotted by a predator, thereby to
increase chances of survival(1). Because freezing usually
takes place in situations where a threat is ambiguous, one
of its evolutionary benefits should be the modulation of
visual processes in such a way that features important for
threat detection can be detected better. Given that
discrimination of coarse visual features is particularly
relevant for fast threat detection, we predict that freezing
facilitates visual sensitivity for low-spatial frequency
targets (LSF) as compared to high-spatial frequency
targets (HSF) containing detailed visual information. To
test this hypothesis, we used a visual discrimination task
in which participants had to determine the orientation of
presented LSF and HSF gratings (i.e. Gabor patches)
under threat of shock vs. no shock condition. Threat of
shock was used to induce freeze reactions assessed
through decelerations of heart rate. The orientation of
gratings on each condition was adjusted by an adaptive
staircase procedure(3). Perceptual performance was
measured by an angular threshold required to perform at
75% accuracy for each condition. Our pilot data
confirmed that heart rate deceleration can be reliably
induced using threat of electric shock. The results of the
complete study will be presented.
H-20
THE ROLE OF THE MEDIAL FRONTAL CORTEX IN
THE MAINTENANCE OF EMOTIONAL STATES
Christian E Waugh, Wake Forest University; Maria G. Lemus,
Stanford University; Ian H. Gotlib, Stanford University Although people are able to maintain emotions well
beyond the duration of the eliciting stimulus, the
mechanisms that underlie this maintenance of emotions
have not been elucidated. In two studies, we examined
whether people maintain emotional states 'actively,' with
explicit elaboration of the emotion, or 'passively', without
elaboration. In the first, behavioral, study, 40 participants
completed an emotional working memory task in which
they were presented with pairs of pictures (either positive
or negative) and were instructed either to maintain the
emotional intensity from the first picture to compare to
63	  

	  

that of the second picture ('maintain' condition), or to only
rate the emotional intensity of their response to the
second picture ('non-maintain' condition). After the task,
participants viewed the pictures again and rated them
with respect to emotional intensity. In support of the
'active' maintenance hypothesis, participants recalled
their emotional responses on the maintenance trials as
being of higher intensity than their emotional responses
on non-maintenance trials. In the second, fMRI, study, 24
participants completed the same affective maintenance
task while their BOLD signal was assessed. We used
inverse logit analyses to extract the duration and
magnitude of participants' BOLD responses to the first
picture of each set. Supporting the 'active' maintenance
hypothesis, when maintaining vs. not maintaining
emotion, participants exhibited increased height and
width of activation in the dorsal medial frontal cortex
(MFC) and lateral prefrontal cortex, regions associated
with explicit emotion generation and manipulation of
contents in working memory, respectively. Supporting
the 'passive' maintenance hypothesis, however, when
viewing negative emotional pictures (vs. neutral pictures)
that were not explicitly maintained, participants exhibited
greater duration of activity in the rostral MFC, a region
associated with implicit emotion generation. Supported
by behavioral findings, this evidence that people maintain
emotional states both naturally in the rMFC and
strategically in the dMFC may be critical for
understanding normal as well as disordered emotion
regulation.
H-21
THE EFFECT OF THREAT ON VISUAL SELECTION
M. Mulckhuyse, Experimental Psychology, Helmholtz
Institute, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; E.S.
Dalmaijer, Experimental Psychology, Helmholtz Institute,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; L. Kenemans,
Experimental Psychology, Helmholtz Institute, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands- Emotional stimuli,
such as threatening stimuli, are known to influence visual
selection. However, how and when these stimuli
modulate visual selection is not yet clear. For example,
one theory argues that threatening stimuli are processed
automatically and affect visual selection very rapidly via a
subcortical pathway, whereas another theory argues the
opposite. This theory states that threatening stimuli are
not processed automatically or faster than other visual
salient stimuli and affect visual selection via cortical
connections. In the current study we measured eye
movement behavior to index the time-course of emotional
modulation of distractors on visual selection. Observers
made a speeded saccade to a neutral target stimulus while
visually salient distractor stimuli were presented. We
used a differential fear-conditioning procedure to present
a threatening (CS+) or a non-threatening distractor (CS-).
The results showed that the threatening distractor
affected the oculomotor system and modulated the timecourse of correct saccades: short saccades latencies were
not modulated by threat whereas longer saccade latencies
were. That is, saccade latency increased in the presence of
threat suggesting delayed disengagement from the
threatening distractor. In addition, the threatening

distractor captured the eyes more often than the nonthreatening distractor indicating stronger competition of
the threatening distractor. However, threat did not affect
latency of these automatically driven error saccades. The
present findings reveal the modulation of threatening
distractors on visual selection and suggest that
threatening stimuli are prioritized in visual selection,
although they are not processed faster than nonthreatening visually salient stimuli.
H-22
EXERCISING
SELF-CONTROL
INCREASES
RELATIVE
LEFT
FRONTAL
CORTICAL
ACTIVATION Adrienne Crowell ; Texas A&M University;
Brandon J. Schmeichel ; Texas A&M University; Eddie
Harmon-Jones ; The University of New South Wales - The
current research assessed patterns of electrical activity in
the frontal lobes following an effortful self-control task to
illuminate the motivational consequences of exercising
self-control. We considered competing predictions. One
prediction is that exercising self-control increases relative
right frontal activation and is consistent with research
based on revised reinforcement sensitivity theory (Corr,
2008; Gray & McNaughton, 2000), which proposes that
behavior is under the guidance of three underlying
neurobiological systems. One system (BIS) is sensitive to
response conflict, enables response inhibition, and has
been linked to relative right cortical activation (Shackman
et al., 2009; Sutton & Davidson, 1997; cf. Coan & Allen,
2003; Hewig et al., 2006). Insofar as BIS contributes to selfcontrol, exercising self-control should increase relative
right-frontal cortical activation. The other prediction is
that exercising self-control increases relative left frontal
activation and is consistent with the limited resource
model of self-control (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000),
which proposes that exercising self-control consumes and
temporarily depletes a limited inner resource.
Accordingly, as the capacity for self-control becomes
depleted, activity in brain regions that underlie selfcontrol (i.e., right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex) should
be reduced. Evidence further suggests that a reduction in
the capacity for self-control is associated with a
concomitant increase in approach motivation (e.g.,
Schmeichel, Harmon-Jones, & Harmon-Jones, 2010),
which portends a temporary increase in relative left
frontal activation following self-control. In the current
experiment, we assessed resting EEG activity before and
after participants wrote a story that did (controlled
writing condition) versus did not (free writing condition)
require them to exercise self-control. We also examined
potential moderating effects of self-reported BIS and BAS
sensitivity, respectively. An average frontal index (AF3/4,
F1/2, F3/4, F5/6, F7/8) was created for each resting
period, and pre-manipulation and post-manipulation
asymmetry indices were calculated (natural log right
minus natural log left). To gauge the effect of the writing
manipulation on prefrontal cortical activity, we computed
the residual value of post-manipulation asymmetric
activity from a regression including pre-manipulation
asymmetric activity as a predictor. A regression analysis
of the residual asymmetry score on BIS, BAS, writing
condition and their interactions revealed a significant
64	  

	  

interaction between BIS and writing condition.
Specifically, among participants lower in BIS, completing
the self-controlled writing task increased relative left
frontal cortical activity compared to completing the free
writing task. The effect of writing condition was not
significant among participants higher in BIS. These results
support the prediction that exercising self-control leads to
an increase in left frontal cortical activity, especially for
those lower in BIS, who are lower in punishment
expectancies. One possibility is that people high in BIS
may not spontaneously engage left frontal resources after
depletion because they expect and worry about ensuing
punishments. Insofar as greater left than right frontal
activity is related to increased approach motivation, the
results could help to explain why people who have
exercised self-control on one task more often fail at
subsequent self-control tasks. The increase in approach
motivation could be leading people to forgo control in
favor of salient approach-related rewards.
H-23
EMPATHY LEVELS MODULATE PSTS ACTIVITY
DURING HUMOR PROCESSING OF PAINFUL
STIMULI Carlos Cardenas-Iniguez, Department of
Psychology, University of Chicago; Jasmin Cloutier,
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago; William M.
Kelly, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences,
Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton, Department of
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College- The
current study investigated the neural correlates of humor
processing, particularly when accompanied by perception
of pain, also known as 'proto-humor' (Gervais & Wilson,
2005; Vrticka et al., 2013). Forty-five participants (22
women, mean age: 22 years) took part in an event-related
fMRI session during which they passively watched video
clips depicting humorous events of a painful nature. After
the scanning session, participants rated how funny they
perceived the videos to be, and these ratings were used in
a parametric random-effects analysis. To investigate the
mediating role of empathy in processing humor in the
presence of physical pain, participants also completed the
Empathy Quotient scale (EQ ; Baron-Cohen and
Wheelwright, 2004). Converging with previous findings,
parametric analyses of functional imaging data showed
increased activity in right posterior superior temporal
sulcus (pSTS) with increasing judgments of humor, a
region previously shown to be involved in humor
comprehension (Hutcherson et al., 2005; Franklin &
Adams, 2011). In addition, individual differences in
empathy level significantly predicted increased right
pSTS activity associated with perceived humor. We also
present preliminary functional connectivity results
between right STS and other regions associated with
humor processing. The results provide additional
evidence for the involvement of the right posterior STS in
humor processing and offers some insights into the
differential impact of empathy on some of the neural
processes underlying the processing of humor and
physical pain.
H-24
DEALING

WITH

DISTRESSING

THOUGHTS:

NEURAL CORRELATES OF REGULATING THE
IMPACT
OF
INTERNAL
EMOTIONAL
DISTRACTION ON WORKING MEMORY Alexandru
D. Iordan, Gina Giase, Yuta Katsumi, Sanda Dolcos, & Florin
Dolcos; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Previous investigations of the impact of task-irrelevant
emotions on cognitive processing have used external
distractors, such as negative (unpleasant) pictures.
However, it is not clear how internal emotional
distraction,
such
as
recollection
of
negative
autobiographical memories (AMs), which resemble
distressing thoughts that occur during rumination in
depression, produces similar effects on ongoing cognition.
Specifically, it is not clear whether recollection of taskirrelevant negative AMs impairs cognitive performance in
healthy behavior, and what the neural correlates of the
response to, and coping with, such internal distraction
are. These issues were investigated using a dual WM
maintenance-AM recollection task, which also included
manipulation of attentional focus during AM recollection
(Context versus Emotion), as an emotion regulation
strategy, in conjunction with fMRI recordings.
Preliminary behavioral results show that focusing on nonemotional contextual aspects of AMs, compared to
focusing on emotion, is associated with reduced
experience of emotion and increased WM performance.
Preliminary fMRI results show that focusing on nonemotional contextual aspects is associated with sustained
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activation and reduced
amygdala activity. Collectively, these results suggest that
focusing away from emotion during the recollection
negative events may be an effective regulation strategy
that reduces the impact of distressing thoughts on
ongoing cognition. These findings from healthy
participants have relevance for clinical research, as
rumination on negative thoughts has been linked to
emotional dysregulation and susceptibility to affective
disorders, whereas the ability to resist distressing
thoughts has been linked to resilience to emotional
disorders.
H-25
SEX DIFFERENCES IN OXYTOCIN EFFECTS ON
FEAR-CONDITIONING Vanessa A. van Ast 1,2, Anna E.
Kunze 3, Nik Papaloukas 3, Karin Roelofs 1,2, Merel Kindt 3; 1
Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 2 Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 3 Department of Clinical
Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands - Animal research has implicated oxytocin in
the down-regulation of fear expression. If so, oxytocin
may be used as an adjunct to treatment of anxiety
disorders in humans. However, no studies so far have
investigated effects of oxytocin on the expression of fear
in emotional learning and memory. Models of the
pathogenesis of anxiety disorders further incorporate sex
as an important vulnerability factor, but the majority of
oxytocin studies tested only male participants. Taken
together, in humans, it is presently unknown whether 1)
oxytocin affects the expression of fear, 2) if possible effects
are subsequently maintained, and 3) whether sex possibly
65	  

	  

plays a moderating role in these relationships. In a
between-subjects, double-blind, placebo-controlled study,
we examined acute and long-term effects of oxytocin on
the physiological expression of fear by administering
oxytocin prior to differential fear conditioning. The next
day, retention of the fear-conditioned responses was
assessed by means of extinction and reinstatement
procedures. Physiological expression of fear was
measured by fear-potentiated startle, skin conductance,
and heart rate. Our findings indicate that oxytocin
administered before fear acquisition attenuated fearpotentiated startle responses and deceleration heart rate
during fear acquisition, but did not abolish fear learning.
These effects were specific for female participants. No
long-term effects of oxytocin were observed whatsoever.
The results of the present study imply that oxytocin could
indeed be used to attenuate immediate, but not long-term,
physiological fear responses in women.
H-26
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN BODILY FREEZING
PREDICT EMOTIONAL BIASES IN DECISION
MAKING Verena Ly 1,2, Quentin Huys 4,5, John F. Stins 6,
Roshan Cools* 2,3 and Karin Roelofs* 1,2; 1 Radboud
University Nijmegen, Behavioural Science Institute, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands; 2 Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Centre for
Cognitive Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, The NetherlandsInstrumental decision making has long been argued to be
vulnerable to emotional responses. Yet the precise nature
of these emotional influences remains unclear. Theories
based on multiple behavioral control systems suggest that
emotional biasing of action selection might reflect effects
of a system that regulates innately specified, evolutionary
preprogrammed responses. To test this hypothesis
directly, we investigated whether effects of emotional
faces on instrumental approach and avoidance responses
can be predicted by effects of emotional faces on bodily
freezing, an innately specified response to aversive
relative to appetitive cues. We tested forty-four women
using a novel socioemotional decision making task
combined with posturography, which involves a force
platform to detect small oscillations of the body to
accurately quantify postural control in upright stance. On
the platform, participants learned whole body approachavoidance actions based on monetary reward or
punishment, while being primed by emotional faces
(angry/happy). Using posturography, it has previously
been shown that angry faces elicit reductions in
spontaneous postural sway, reminiscent of bodily
freezing, a defensive reaction to threat. The combined setup in the current study, allowed us to quantify an
innately specified response to the emotional face, i.e.
bodily freezing, as well as its predictive value for the
subsequent instrumental response. Our results show that
the effects of the emotional faces on the instrumental
response are action-specific. Thus, angry relative to happy
faces speeded instrumental avoidance relative to
approach responses. Critically, individual differences in
this emotional effect were predicted by individual
differences in bodily freezing. This finding strengthens
the hypothesis that emotional biasing of instrumental

action involves interaction with a system that controls
innately specified responses.
H-27
PERSONALITY TRAITS CORRELATE WITH NEURAL
ACTIVATIONS
DURING
FOOD
DECISIONMAKING J. Bradley C. Cherry, Department of Psychology,
University of Missouri-Kansas City; John M. Crespi,
Department of Agricultural Economics, Kansas State
University; Jayson L. Lusk, Department of Agricultural
Economics, Oklahoma State University; Laura E. Martin,
Hoglund Brain Imaging Center, University of Kansas Medical
Center; Amanda S. Bruce, Department of Psychology,
University of Missouri-Kansas City - Little is known about
the relationship between personality and food decisionmaking where foods produced using controversial
biotechnologies are concerned. We examined the
relationship between consumers' neuroticism and
extraversion and their neural activations in two food
decision-making contexts involving foods produced using
controversial biotechnologies. When neural activations in
these contexts were contrasted and analyzed, we
hypothesized activation in anterior cingulate cortex
would correlate positively with neuroticism, and
activation in lateral prefrontal cortex would correlate
positively with extraversion. Methods: We recruited 47
healthy participants (23 females; aged 18-55 years; M =
31.9 years) to complete the NEO-Five-Factor Inventory-3
(NEO-FFI-3) and undergo two event-related functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans. During these
scans, participants performed a food decision-making
task, making 84 binary decisions between two types of
milk. The two options presented in each decision differed
according to three conditions: a "price" condition, in
which the options' prices differed, but the technologies
used to produce them did not; a "technology" condition,
in which the technologies used to produce the options
differed, but their prices did not; and a "combination"
condition, in which the prices of the options and the
technologies used to produce them both differed. We
used BrainVoyager QX to conduct a whole-brain analysis
of participants' neural activations during combination
versus price decisions, followed by a whole-brain
correlation of those neural activations and participants'
neuroticism and extraversion T scores. Results: Neural
activations correlated negatively (p < .01, cluster
threshold = 16 voxels) with neuroticism, with correlations
observed in right medial frontal gyrus (Brodmann Area
[BA] 10; x = 8, y = 52, z = 12; r = -0.55) and left insula (BA
13; x = -34, y = 25, z = 9; r = -0.53). Neural activations
correlated positively (p < .01, cluster threshold = 16
voxels) with extraversion, with correlations observed in
right middle frontal gyrus (BA 10; x = 29, y = 49, z = 9; r =
0.58), right inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45; x = 38, y = 25, z =
3; r = 0.51), and left anterior cingulate (BA 32; x = -22, y =
49, z = 9; r = 0.58). Discussion: Inconsistent with our
hypothesis, we did not observe a significant relationship
between activation in anterior cingulate cortex and
neuroticism, which could be due to the very specific
nature of the food decision-making task. However,
consistent with our hypothesis, we observed activation in
several regions of prefrontal cortex to be significantly
66	  

	  

associated with extraversion scores. Limitations to this
study include the use of a single food product and,
according to eight participants, the use of somewhat
unrealistically high prices. However, participants'
reactions to the high prices seemed consistent with the
hypothesis of loss aversion, though this was not explicitly
tested. Future food studies should examine this issue
further, and perhaps use a wider variety of both food and
non-food products.

H-28
EFFECT OF PARTIAL SLEEP DEPRIVATION ON
EMPATHY FOR PAIN IN AN FMRI EXPERIMENT
Gustav Nilsonne, Sandra Tamm, Paolo d'Onofrio, Hanna
Thuné, Johanna Schwarz, Predrag Petrovic, Håkan Fischer,
Göran Kecklund, Torbjörn Åkerstedt, and Mats Lekander;
Stockholm University and Karolinska Institutet- Disturbed
sleep affects emotional responding. It is however
unknown whether disturbed sleep also affects empathy
for pain. We have investigated the effect of partial sleep
deprivation on empathic responding. Predefined regions
of interest were the bilateral anterior insulae and the
medial cingulate cortex, which is postulated to form a
core network for empathy. Healthy volunteers (n = 21,
mean age 24, SD 3, 10 female) participated in a trial of
partial sleep deprivation (3h sleep) using a cross-over
design, monitored by polysomnography at home. During
fMRI, participants viewed pictures of hands being stung
by needles or poked with a Q-tip. Across sleep conditions,
pain stimuli caused significantly increased activity in the
anterior insulae (p < 0.005) and medial cingulate cortex (p
< 0.001), using region-of-interest analyses. In addition,
whole-brain analyses showed significant activation in the
left inferior parietal (p < 0.001) and left primary
sensorimotor cortices (p < 0.001). Partial sleep deprivation
caused participants to report increased levels of
unpleasantness (p < 0.01) when viewing pain stimuli. No
significant effects of sleep deprivation were however
detected in fMRI analyses. Self-rated empathy using the
Interpersonal Reactivity Index subscale Empathic
Concern was not significantly related to activation in
insulae nor in cingulate cortex in the pain vs no pain
contrast. These data do not support a major effect of sleep
deprivation on empathic processing in the brain.
H-29
THE ROLE OF CORTICOSTEROIDS IN DOWN
REGULATING
THE
RESPONSE
TO
ACUTE
STRESSORS Erno Hermans; Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour and Department for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands - Corticosteroids are released
through activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA)
axis
in
response
to
acute
stressors.
Accumulating evidence suggests that corticosteroids play
a key role in the return to homeostasis following stress
exposure. For instance, corticosteroids exert negative
feedback on the HPA axis itself, a mechanism that is
hippocampally dependent. Recent findings in humans

moreover demonstrate that corticosteroid administration
has anxiolytic-like effects and down regulates the neural
circuitry
involved
in
generating
emotional
arousal, including the amygdala, suggesting that
corticosteroid release during stressful experiences serves
to limit responsiveness to stressors. However, no study to
date has demonstrated that blockade of corticosteroid
release during acute stress indeed leads to excessive or
prolonged emotional arousal. We therefore administered
metyrapone (750 mg twice) or placebo in healthy
volunteers
before
stress
induction.
Metyrapone
suppresses adrenal 11ß-steroid hydroxylase and thereby
blocks corticosteroid production. Stress was induced by
exposure to four highly aversive movie clips. Participants
moreover received two electrical shocks and were under
continuous threat of shock. In between movie clips,
participants viewed three blocks of negatively arousing
photographs (approx. 10, 20, and 30 min post-stressor
onset). All procedures took place inside an MRI scanner.
We recorded BOLD-fMRI and pupil dilation responses
(measure of sympathetic arousal) to photographs, and
measured salivary cortisol before and after stress. Around
testing, cortisol levels were substantially lower after
metyrapone
(3.8
nmol/L)
than
placebo
(9.3
nmol/L, P<.001), and cortisol levels increased after stress
only after placebo (P<.05). Pupil dilation responses to
photographs were stronger in the metyrapone group
(P<.05), but did not differ between blocks. This effect was
accompanied by an increased BOLD response in a cluster
at the amygdala-hippocampal junction (peak: [30, -16, 16], t=4.42, P=.006, SVC). Thus, in line with expectations,
we found that cortisol blockade increased responsiveness
to negatively arousing stimuli both at a neural level and
in a measure of sympathetic arousal. We found no
evidence of a time-dependency of this effect (stronger
effect in later blocks), which may be due to the fact that
cortisol levels were already lowered prior to the onset of
the stressor in the metyrapone group. In conclusion, these
findings suggest that blockade of endogenous cortisol
leads to a disinhibition of emotional arousal during acute
stress through a reduced inhibition of amygdalahippocampal circuits.
H-30
THE AMGYDALA'S ROLE IN PROCESSING THE
TRUSTWORTHINESS OF UNSEEN FACES Ryan M.
Stolier, Dartmouth College; Eric A. Hehman, Dartmouth
College; Zachary A. Ingbretsen, Dartmouth College; Jonathan
B. Freeman, Dartmouth College - The amygdala has been
implicated in the processing of facial trustworthiness
when a face is clearly visible. However, it remains an
open question whether the amygdala is responsive to
high-level facial information such as trustworthiness
without perceptual awareness. In both blocked and eventrelated designs, we used a backward masking paradigm
to test amygdala responsivity to the trustworthiness of
subjectively unseen faces. Both computer-generated and
real faces varying in trustworthiness were presented
subliminally, masked by faces neutral in trustworthiness.
Regions in the amygdala tracked both how untrustworthy
a face appeared (i.e., negative-linear responses) as well as
the overall strength of a face's trustworthiness signal (i.e.,
67	  

	  

nonlinear responses), despite faces not being subjectively
seen. The findings demonstrate that the amygdala can be
influenced by even high-level facial information before
that information is consciously perceived, and bolster
existing evidence for the amygdala's role in automatic and
rapid social evaluation.

H-31
THE
PSYCHONEUROENDOCRINOLOGICAL
EFFECTS OF SOCIAL STRESS AND LEADERSHIP:
ALTERED HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY-ADRENAL
(HPA) REACTIVITY IN PEOPLE WITH INHIBITED
TEMPERAMENTS Kostek, John A. 12, VanMeenen, Kirsten
M. 12, Janke, Kellie 23, Beck, Kevin D. 12, Myers, Catherine E.
12, Pang, Kevin C.H. 12, Servatius, Richard J. 12; 1 VA New
Jersey Health Care System, East Orange, NJ ; 2 Stress and
Motivated Behavior Institute, New Jersey Medical School,
Rutgers, Newark, NJ ; 3 Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark,
NJ - Introduction: Stress is often studied under artificial
laboratory conditions (e.g. Trier Social Stress Test) or in
extreme naturalistic settings (e.g. skydiving). However,
the stress of everyday stimulation such as leading a group
or performing before coworkers is often overlooked.
Importantly, the strength and duration of stress responses
can vary widely between people due to differences in
experiences, personality, and biological predispositions.
These individual variations in stress reactivity may have
implications for the etiology of affective disorders (e.g.
anxiety disorders, depression). One known risk factor for
the development of anxiety disorders is Behavioral
Inhibition (BI). Inhibited people tend to avoid and
withdraw from novel social and nonsocial stimuli.
However, the extent to which inhibited people have
altered stress reactivity is unknown. The present research
was designed to investigate stress reactivity in response
to social stress and leading in inhibited people as well as
to examine the lasting effects of occupational training on
self-confidence. Method: 84 healthy adults participated
in a week-long occupational training course to familiarize
them with military life and routine. On the first day of
training, volunteers completed a battery of questionnaires
including the Adult Measure of Behavioral Inhibition
(AMBI), and Leadership and Personal Self-Efficacy scales
(LSE, PSE). Follow-up questionnaires were sent to
participants the Monday after training. To assess the acute
stress effects of training, saliva was collected proximal to
two field exercises: 1) Drill & Ceremony: learning to
march and give commands during drill and ceremony
maneuvers; and 2) Building Entry: leading a squad
during a force-on-force exercise using laser tag
equipment. For Building Entry, squad participants were
matched for BI and randomly assigned to the roles of
squad leader or follower. Saliva samples were assayed for
Œ±-amylase (sAA), cortisol and DHEA. Results: Basal
concentrations of neurosteroids and sAA were unrelated
to questionnaire scores. However, examination of HPA
(hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal) activation revealed that
inhibited people exhibited blunted cortisol reactivity, and
no differences in DHEA or sAA, compared to uninhibited

people during Drill & Ceremony. Additionally,
participants that were assigned to lead their squad during
Building Entry had large cortisol elevations and reported
decreased PSE and LSE scores while followers had
relatively smaller cortisol responses and reported
increases in PSE and LSE scores after training.
Discussion: One explanation of blunted cortisol reactivity
in BI is that inhibited people are more sensitive to stress
and thus have more frequent HPA activation. Over time,
the HPA negative feedback system down regulates to
accommodate higher concentrations of circulating
cortisol. This habituation would present as blunted
reactivity in response to normal activation. In Building
Entry, leaders and followers had similar physical
exertion. Thus, the observed cortisol elevations in leaders
reflect the social stress associated with leading a group
and the stress of leading may have been the driving force
in the decreased PSE and LSE scores. Leading may not
always be associated with lower cortisol as previous
literature would suggest. Overall, accounting for
personality in the assessment of stress offers a distinct
advantage: a priori prediction of reactivity and its
attendant neurobiology.
H-32
INTEGRATING PERSONALITY AND FUNCTIONAL
BRAIN IMAGING TO EXPLAIN RISKY CHOICES
Claudia Civai, Department of Economics, University of
Minnesota -TC; Daniel R. Hawes, Department of Psychology,
Stanford University; Colin G. DeYoung, Department of
Psychology, University of Minnesota -TC; Aldo Rustichini,
Department of Economics, University of Minnesota -TC- We
investigate risky decision-making by testing how
preferences, personality traits, IQ and neural activations
are correlated. Seventy-five subjects performed a lottery
task while in a 3T MRI scanner: they were required to
choose between two either winning (Gain) or losing
(Loss) lotteries, equal in their expected value but different
in their variance. Variance is defined as the average
deviation between the possible outcomes of the lottery
and its expected value, and it is considered a measure of
riskiness. Personality and IQ were assessed using the
Personality Inventory for DSM-5 (PID-5), the Big Five
Aspect Scale (BFAS) and the Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale (WAIS-IV). Risk acceptance (RA) was measured as
the percentage of chosen risky lotteries. RA_Gain and
RA_Loss choices were not correlated. Participants made
more risky choices in Gain with respect to Loss (t
(74)=3.841; p<0.001). A strong positive correlation was
found between RA and IQ, but only for Gain choices
(Œ≤=.375, p<.01); interestingly, for both Gain and Loss, a
positive correlation was found between RA and
Grandiosity, a PID-5 scale related to risk sensitivity and
overestimation of one's own abilities (Œ≤=.313; p<0.05
and Œ≤=.231; p=0.091, respectively). Neural activations
were analyzed by fitting a model with 14 parametric
regressors, to define areas whose activation increased
together with either the variance or the expected value of
each lottery presented. Here, we discuss main results for
variance-related activity at the moment of the
presentation of the lotteries. Ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC), dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC) and
68	  

	  

amygdala, bilaterally, increased their activations with the
increase of Gain variance; interestingly, these activations
were negatively correlated with both RA_Gain and
Grandiosity. Moreover, increased amygdala activation
was also positively correlated with Withdrawal, a facet of
Neuroticism (BFAS trait) associated with passive
avoidance of negative stimuli. As far as the Loss choices
are concerned, the activations in bilateral amygdala,
putamen and pallidus positively correlated also with Loss
variance, and, although no significant correlation was
found between these activations and RA_Loss,
Withdrawal was positively associated with the amygdala
activation. Bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and
parietal cortex, in particular anterior and posterior
supramarginal gyrus, were also positively associated with
the increase in both Gain and Loss variance, but no other
significant correlations were found, suggesting that the
involvement of these areas was associated with the
elaboration of the riskiness, but not with the selection of
the response. These results suggest that when rewardsensitive and emotional areas (vmPFC, dACC, amygdala)
are more activated by the riskiness of the choice, the RA is
reduced, as far as Gain condition is concerned; moreover,
these activations are modulated by personality traits such
as Grandiosity and Neuroticism, which are linked to
sensitivity to risk and punishment. More broadly, these
findings highlight the importance of considering
personality traits as an important factor for explaining
individual
preferences
and
the
neuro-cognitive
mechanisms that underpin the perception of risk.
H-33
REDUCED AMYGDALA VOLUME IS ASSOCIATED
WITH DEFICITS IN INHIBITORY CONTROL: A
VOXEL AND SURFACE-BASED MORPHOMETRIC
ANALYSIS OF COMORBID PTSD/mTBI Depue, B.E.
1,2, Olson-Madden, J. 3,4, Smolker, H.R. 1, Rajamani, M. 3,
Brenner, L.A. 3,4 & Banich, M.T. 1,2; University of Colorado
at Boulder, Institute of Cognitive Science1; University of
Colorado at Boulder, Department of Psychology and
Neuroscience2; VISN 19 Mental Illness Research Education
and Clinical Center3; University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz
Medical Campus4 - A significant portion of previously
deployed combat Veterans from Operation Enduring
Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation New
Dawn (OEF/OIF/OND) are affected by comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and mild traumatic brain
injury (mTBI). Despite this fact, neuroimaging studies
investigating the neural correlates of cognitive
dysfunction within this population are almost
nonexistent.
Nonetheless,
a
large
number
of
neuroimaging studies have investigated the neural
correlates associated with the diagnosis of PTSD and TBI
in isolation, rather than co-morbidly. Prior studies among
each cohort (PTSD or TBI) have revealed alterations in the
structure and function of the hippocampus, amygdala,
and ventro-medial PFC and/or sub-genual anterior
cingulate cortex. In both populations dysfunction in these
brain regions has been linked to deficits in inhibitory
control. The current study used both voxel-based and
surface-based morphometery to determine whether
comorbid PTSD/mTBI is characterized by altered brain

structure in the same regions as observed in singular
diagnostic PTSD or TBI. Furthermore, we assessed
whether alterations in brain structures in these regions
were associated with behavioral measures related to
inhibitory control, as assessed by the Go/No-go task, selfreports of impulsivity, and/or PTSD or mTBI symptoms.
Results indicate volumetric reductions in the bilateral
anterior amygdala in our comorbid PTSD/mTBI sample
as compared to a control sample of OEF/OIF veterans
with no history of mTBI and/or PTSD. Moreover,
increased volume reduction in the amygdala predicted
poorer inhibitory control as measured by performance on
the Go/No-go task, increased self-reported impulsivity,
and greater symptoms associated with PTSD. These
findings suggest that alterations in brain anatomy in
OEF/OIF veterans with co-morbid PTSD/mTBI are
associated with both cognitive deficits and trauma
symptoms related to PTSD.
H-34
ACTIVITY IN VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX IS RELATED TO SIGNIFICANCE OF
OWNING OBJECTS FROM DIFFERENT SOCIAL
SOURCES Kyungmi Kim, Marcia K. Johnson; Department of
Psychology, Yale University - Well-being and subjective
experience of a coherent world depend on our sense of
"self" and relations between the self and the environment
(e.g., people, objects). As noted by William James
(1890/1983), individuals place a "unique kind of interest"
on aspects of the world that one can call 'me or mine'
compared to those that are 'not me or not mine' (James,
1890/1983). When people contemplate the 'me or mine'
aspects of the world (i.e., self-related processing), the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC) reliably activates
(Lieberman, 2010). Altered vMPFC activity during selfrelated processing is one of the characteristic features of
patients with disorders in emotional/social processing
(e.g., depression, autism). Yet, despite substantial
evidence implicating vMPFC in self-related processing,
the function of this region in such processing is poorly
understood. Across various domains, vMPFC activity has
been associated with the "positivity" of experiences (e.g.,
fear extinction, positive reappraisal success) and in
particular, vMPFC reflects subjective value of various
types of stimuli ranging from food to social reward
(Rangel & Hare, 2010). Thus, one possibility is that
vMPFC represents positive subjective value of self-related
information or assigns positive subjective value to
information by virtue of its self-relatedness. An
alternative is that vMPFC assigns personal significance to
self-related
information
by
evaluating
its
meaning/function for the self (D'Argembeau, 2013). In
this case, vMPFC activity would not be necessarily always
associated with positive value of self-related information.
We tested these two alternatives (i.e., positive subjective
valuation vs. assignment of personal significance) by
contrasting contexts in which self-relevance of stimuli is
likely to yield positive vs. negative subjective values.
During functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
participants imagined owning objects associated with
either their perceived ingroup or outgroup. Ownershipinduced attitudinal changes (i.e., mere ownership effect)
69	  

	  

were measured by having participants rate their
preference for objects before and after imagining owning
the objects. If vMPFC activity primarily reflects positive
subjective valuation, post-ownership preference increases
should be related to greater vMPFC activity during
ownership imagination regardless of an object's
association with one's ingroup or outgroup. Alternatively,
if vMPFC activity primarily reflects assignment of
personal significance, the personal significance of
assimilating with one's ingroup should be reflected in
greater vMPFC activity associated with preference
increases from pre- to post-ownership whereas the
personal significance of differentiating from one's
outgroup should be reflected in greater vMPFC activity
associated with preference decreases from pre- to postownership. We found that for ingroup-associated objects,
vMPFC showed greater activity for objects with increased
than decreased post-ownership preference. In contrast, for
outgroup-associated objects, vMPFC showed greater
activity for objects with decreased than increased postownership preference. Our findings suggest that the
function vMPFC in self-related processing may not be to
represent/evaluate the "positivity" or absolute preference
of self-related information but to assign personal
significance to it based on its meaning/function for the
self.
H-35
SCARILY COMING TO THE CENTRE: POLITICAL
CENTRISM AS AN EFFECT OF MORTALITY
SALIENCE AND A NEED FOR CLOSURE Carlos Alberto
Rivera García; University of Essex - Three studies assessed
the relationship between need for closure (NFC;
Kruglanski, Webster, & Klem, 1993) and evaluations of
political ideology changes, as a function of mortality
salience (MS). Based on terror management theory
(Greenberg, Pyszczynski, & Solomon, 1986) and previous
research (e.g., Cozzolino, 2006; Jost et al., 2003), we
hypothesized that abstract reminders of death would
activate the facet of NFC that seeks group consensus and
stability (as opposed to deviation and persuasion).
Following an MS or control induction, 156 participants
evaluated politicians who switched political ideologies
(moved from the left to the right). In line with recent
research (Fu et al., 2007), results indicate that MS induced
people high in NFC to express greater support for
politicians seeking consensus in the political centre,
compared to politicians endorsing liberal or conservative
ideologies, an effect consistent with research linking NFC
to desires for group centrism and collective closure. A
second study (N= 170) clarified this issue further with
participants evaluating political parties (rather than
individual politicians) depicted as moving from their
traditional left/right positions toward the political centre
in one condition, or parties that remained true to their
traditional ideologies in a second condition. Results
revealed that participants high in NFC exposed to MS
expressed significantly higher levels of support for parties
moving from the extreme right to the centre, than for
parties moving from the extreme left to the centre. A third
study (N=276) explored how the activation of specific
needs for cognitive closure via MS would result in an

increased support for a centrist political party described
as uniform in thought and enjoying an internal (vs. split)
mandate for the party's manifesto. The results further
indicate that reminders of mortality amplify demands for
consensus and clarity more than signaling a demand for
ideological clarity. Results and implications are discussed.
H-36
TRAIT OPTIMISM MEDIATES THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN GREY MATTER VOLUME IN THE
ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX AND RESILIENCE TO
AFFECTIVE DYSREGULATION Yifan Hu, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (IL), USA; Matthew Moore,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (IL), USA;
Alexandru D. Iordan, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign (IL), USA; Sanda Dolcos, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (IL), USA- Trait optimism, reflected in
individuals' tendency to maintain positive expectations
even in the face of adversities, plays a strong protective
role against symptoms of affective dysregulation (i.e.,
depression and anxiety symptoms). Lateral orbitofrontal
cortex (lOFC), a region involved in higher-level emotional
integration, emotion-cognition interactions, and emotion
control, has been linked in functional neuroimaging
studies to cognitive processes that are highly relevant to
the thinking and behavior patterns entailed by optimism,
such as the ability to evaluate negative events and to
adapt to the changing environment. Furthermore,
research employing volumetric analyses has consistently
reported a reduction in the volume of lOFC in patients
with depression and those with anxiety disorders,
compared to healthy subjects. However, an open question
concerns the role of optimism in the relationship between
the OFC volumes and symptoms of anxiety and
depression in healthy participants. Here, we investigated
this issue in 55 subjects who completed measures of
optimism (Life Orientation Test), depression (Beck
Depression Inventory), and trait anxiety (State-Trait
Anxiety Inventory-Trait), and underwent MRI scanning.
Analyses focused on lOFC volumes extracted using
automatic parcellation, and mediation analyses were
performed with optimism being the mediator. Results
showed that optimism was positively associated with the
lOFC volume and negatively associated with both anxiety
and depression symptoms. Moreover, optimism had a
negative mediating effect on the relationships between
grey matter volume in the lOFC and symptoms of anxiety
and depression, suggesting that reduced volume of this
region predicts vulnerability, whereas increased volume
predicts resilience to these symptoms. Taken together,
these results suggest that personality traits indexing
positive affect mediate the protective role of grey matter
volume in emotion regulation regions against symptoms
of affective dysregulation. These results provide novel
insights into the relationship between personality and
brain structure, and have significance for developing
therapeutic and preventive interventions aimed to reduce
susceptibility and increase resilience to affective
dysregulation.
H-37
70	  

	  

INHIBITORY CONTROL TRAINING EFFECTS ON
TIMING AND NEURAL OVERLAP OF INHIBITORY
CONTROL AND AFFECT REGULATION Kathryn S.
Gilliam, Lauren E. Kahn, Rebecca D. Calcott, Junaid S.
Merchant, Elliot T. Berkman ; Affiliation: University of Oregon
- A domain-general model of self-control posits that
different domains of self-control share a common neural
substrate and that training in one domain (e.g., inhibitory
control) will transfer to another (e.g., affect regulation).
Previous behavioral and neuroimaging have supported
the existence of this common neural substrate in the right
inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG). Evidence also exists for the
involvement of rIFG in the successful training of
inhibitory control. Yet, transfer effects (i.e., generalization
of training-related improvements to untrained tasks) have
been harder to demonstrate. What are the neural changes
associated with inhibitory control training? How can
these be used to predict transfer effects? To answer these
questions, we conducted a functional neuroimaging study
on eighty healthy college-aged participants. These
participants were randomly assigned to one of three
groups: an inhibitory control training group, a sham
training group, or a passive control group. All groups
completed pre and post-training fMRI scans during which
they performed the Stop Signal Task (SST) and an affect
regulation task involving both cognitive reappraisal and
affect labeling. The SST required the participants to
establish a prepotent "go" response and then to selectively
inhibit this response after hearing an auditory "stop" cue.
The affect regulation task directed participants either to
decrease their emotional response to distressing images
(using cognitive reappraisal or affect labeling) or to
simply observe the images. During the three-week period
between scans, the training group returned to the lab to
complete ten 7-minute training sessions on the SST. The
sham training group also returned to the lab ten times
and completed a non-inhibition control task. The passive
control group only completed the pre and post scans.
Results reveal that inhibitory control and affect regulation
recruit similar regions, including rIFG, across groups at
baseline. Preliminary analyses suggest that the degree of
neural overlap across tasks varies by experimental group
following the training period. Additionally, preliminary
analyses also suggest that the timecourse of regulation
across tasks varies by experimental group. Results will be
discussed in the context of domain-general self-control
and potential mechanisms by which inhibitory control
might be most likely to generalize.
H-38
WHAT
IS EGO
DEPLETION? A
NEURALMECHANISTIC
EXPLORATION
OF
SELFREGULATION AND SELF-AFFIRMATION Jordan L.
Livingston, University of Oregon; Rose E. Jeffries, University
of Oregon; Elliot T. Berkman, University of Oregon; - Over
one hundred studies have now demonstrated that
performance on sequential self-control tasks declines as
self-regulation demands increase (Hagger et al., 2010).
However, the mechanism of this "ego depletion" effect
remains elusive. As a result, there are now several
mechanistic theories under investigation, and it has been
proposed that neuroscience can inform this debate

(Berkman & Miller-Ziegler, 2013).
One particularly
promising model suggests that ego depletion is caused by
reorientation of attention and motivation vis-√†-vis
gratifications, such that attention and motivation shift
towards gratification as self-regulation demands increase
(Inzlicht & Schmeichel 2012). However, no study has
directly tested this theory. We used a dot probe to index
attentional biases towards rewarding, neutral, and threatrelated words in a repeated-measures design at baseline,
after depletion, and after self-affirmation, which has been
shown to reverse depletion (Schmeichel & Vohs, 2009).
Contrary to the theory, behavioral results suggest that
depletion eliminates initial biases toward rewards (vs.
threats). However, self-affirmation following depletion
does enhance attention to self-relevant threats. These
results suggest that the effects of depletion and
affirmation may, in fact, operate via shifts in attention,
though not necessarily by increasing attention to rewards.
In order to further tease apart these results, we are
currently collecting pilot fMRI data to directly test the
attention-motivation theory of ego depletion, and will
have a full sample well ahead of the conference in April.
Using Neurosynth to generate a priori ROIs related to
"attention," we expect shifts in depletion to be associated
with changes in the dorsal frontoparietal network such
that depletion will be associated with less activity (i.e.,
less directed attention) compared to control conditions.
Furthermore, because the attention-motivation model
hypothesizes that shifts in attention are a result of
changing needs for gratification, we expect that depletion
will likely be associated with changes in reward areas
such that, for example, self-affirmation will be associated
with increased activity in the nucleus accumbens and the
ventral tegmental area (Tamir & Mitchell, 2012). Such
results will serve as a prime example of neuroscience
informing psychological theory as we expect that the
results will help to illuminate the long held debate
regarding the mechanisms of ego depletion.
H-39
INSULTS HURT AND THEY KEEP HURTING,
ESPECIALLY WHEN THEY ARE ABOUT YOU!
EVIDENCE FROM EEG AND SKIN CONDUCTANCE
MEASURES Marijn Struiksma, UiL OTS, Utrecht
University; Hannah De Mulder, UiL OTS, Utrecht University;
Nicola Spotorno, University of Pennsylvania; Jana Basnakova,
Slovak Academy of Sciences; Jos van Berkum, UiL OTS,
Utrecht University - Research on emotion in language has
mainly focused on the processing of emotion words in
isolation (Citron, 2012). Using EEG and skin conductance
measures, we investigated how compliments and insults
are processed in a sentence that either directly addressed
the participant or targeted somebody else (e.g.
'[participant's name]/Jane is ugly/beautiful'). Our main
questions were whether the sentence context is rapidly
integrated into processing and whether participants
differentially adapt to insults and complements. Relative
to compliments, insults elicited a stronger P2 response
(150-250ms), regardless of who was addressed. This
suggests that a generic negativity bias is already present
during early perceptual processing, possibly reflecting
rapid detection of, and focus on, the taboo nature of
71	  

	  

insulting words. In the 350-500ms latency range the
negativity bias was modulated by who was addressed.
Relative to compliments, insults elicited a strong Late
Positive Potential (LPP) response. However, the effect
was strongest when the insults were directed at the
participant in contrast to when they were directed at
somebody else. These personal insults also elicited the
strongest skin conductance response, suggesting that
sympathetic activation is not only driven by the
occurrence of a negative word, but is also sensitive to the
sentence context. Interestingly, multiple repetitions of our
stimuli did not modulate the early and late effects, which
suggests that both the initial generic response to insults
and the following specific response to personal insults do
not readily adapt. Together, our findings indicate that
even in a contrived and highly 'impersonal' lab setting,
insults affect participants' physiological and neural
responses especially when they directly address the
participant. And at the neural level they continue to do so
over repetition.
H-40
JAILBREAKING COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL: A SELF
VS. OTHER PERSPECTIVE Ana Draghici, Erik Knight
Wing, Kateri McRae; University of Denver, Denver, Colorado Cognitive reappraisal, an emotion regulation strategy that
involves purposefully reinterpreting an emotion-eliciting
event in order to change the duration, intensity, or type of
emotion one is experiencing (Gross, 1998), has been
shown to be one of the most effective ways to alter an
emotional response (Goldin et al., 2008; McRae et al.,
2010). There is, however, significant variation across
people and situations in how well cognitive reappraisal
works (John & Gross, 2007), and new research is
beginning to shed light on the notion that some types of
reappraising are more successful than others (McRae,
Ciesielski, & Gross, 2012). We compared the behavioral
and neural outcomes of two different types of reappraisal:
reinterpreting an emotional event in order to change one's
own emotional response vs. reinterpreting in order to
change someone else's emotional response. In Study 1, we
used a well-validated picture reappraisal task (Gross,
1998) to compare 62 participants' responses to neutral and
negative IAPS pictures (Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2008),
paired with different types of reappraisal instructions.
The experiment used a 2 x 3 mixed repeated measures
design with Instruction Target (Self vs. Other) varied
between participants, and Trial Type (Look Neutral, vs.
Look Negative, vs. Change Negative) varied within
participants, 40 trials for each within condition.
Participants in the Self condition received the typical
reappraisal training and were told that they'd see a
variety of pictures preceded by an instruction to either
allow themselves to react naturally (Look) or think about
ways of reinterpreting the events depicted so they feel
less negative (Change). Participants in the Other
condition were told to imagine throughout that a friend is
viewing the pictures at the same time, and either let
themselves and their friend react naturally (Look) or think
about ways of reinterpreting the events depicted so their
friend feels less negative (Change). We collected selfreport measures of negative affect after each experimental

trial and, at the end of the experiment, measures of
overall task difficulty, motivation, and perceived task
success for the Look Neutral, Look Negative, and Change
Negative trials, respectively. In Study 2, we used a withinparticipants variation of the same design in a functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment to
compare whole-brain blood oxygen level-dependent
(BOLD) responses for each Trial Type (Look Neutral,
Look Negative, Change Negative) and Target (Self vs.
Other). 18 participants alternated between randomized
event-related Look Neutral, Look Negative, and Change
Negative trials (36 each) grouped in 4 counterbalanced
blocks where the Instruction Target alternated between
Self and Other. Along with the same self-report measures
from Study 1, we used measures of brain structure and
function to compare and contrast the effects of the two
different Instruction Target conditions on the neural
markers of Reactivity (Look Negative > Look Neutral)
and Regulation (Change Negative > Look Negative).
Results of the two studies are discussed in terms of
effectiveness and efficiency of each emotion regulation
strategy, as well as the common and distinct brain areas
that the two strategies rely on.
H-41
MOVIE TRAILERS: THE NEURAL BASIS OF
INTUITIVE CONSUMER CHOICE Vincent Schoots (1,2),
Maarten Boksem (1,2) , Alan Sanfey (2,3) , Ale Smidts (1); 1
Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam School of
Management; 2 Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition & Behaviour; 3Radboud
University Nijmegen; Behavioural Science Insititute - In daily
life, we face decisions of widely different nature. While
enormous progress has been made explaining choice with
economic models, there is still a lack of understanding of
non-reasoned choice processes. The choice to watch a
particular movie, for instance, generally evolves while
watching its trailer, without much deliberation. Which
mental processes underlie this preference formation?
Studying this process is valuable for theory building, but
also has a practical application for marketers if we can
predict individual or out-of-sample choice using
neuroimaging. We set out to study movie choice in detail
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), eye
tracker and heart rate measurements. Our aim is twofold:
1) to provide insight into the mental processes underlying
consumer choice in a non-reasoned, intuitive decision
setting, and 2) to assess how we can predict consumer
choice using fMRI. 30 participants watch the cinematic
trailers of 18 recent movies which they have not seen yet,
while lying in the scanner. We collect a number of stated
(e.g. willingness to pay) and revealed (choose three DVD's
to take home) preference measures for these movies. In
addition, we obtained US box office revenue for the 18
movies from the internet movie database (IMDb), as a
measure of real-world commercial success. We will use
an ROI-based approach to track neural activity for a
preferred versus non-preferred trailer in key nodes in the
neural decision network. We will also assess how much
variance in choice can be predicted by fMRI over and
above classic behavioral preference measures. Later, we
will compare this with the predictive value of heart rate
72	  

	  

and eye tracker data, and use multivariate analyses on
our neuroimaging data to elucidate preference formation
and predict choice.
H-42
INCENTIVIZING INHIBITORY CONTROL WITH
REWARD Lauren E. Kahn, Casey Magis-Agosta, & Elliot T.
Berkman (University of Oregon)- According to dual process
models of cognition, "cold" top-down processes (e.g.,
control) operate in opposition to "hot" bottom-up
processes (e.g., reward) at both the behavioral and neural
levels (Heatherton & Wagner, 2011). According to these
models, behavior is driven by a competition between the
two systems in a given situation. A alternative model
describes behavior instead as being guided by a single
subjective value computation which in turn is influenced
by multiple factors including ongoing goals and
temptations (Hare, Camerer, & Rangel, 2009). Critically, if
value is the primary determinant of action, then a
manipulation of value should alter behavior, even when a
"hot" incentive is used to produce a "cold" result
(controlled behavior). In our study, we tested whether
one component of self-control, response inhibition, could
be incentivized using explicit rewards. If so, this could
pose a problem for dual process models, since they
generally consider response inhibition part of the "cold"
system, while rewarding processes are considered as part
of the "hot" system. Identifying the neural underpinnings
of incentivized self-control in this way will illuminate
how systems previously thought to act in opposition may
instead work together to produce "controlled" behavior.
Response inhibition was measured using the stop-signal
task, which induces a prepotent motor response that must
be inhibited on one-quarter of the trials when a beep (the
"stop-signal") is presented. Participants completed two
non-incentivized runs of the task for a baseline, and then
completed three runs of the task at three different
incentive levels counterbalanced for order. Participants
were paid twenty, forty, or sixty cents for successfully
inhibiting their motor response during "stop" trials, and
five cents for pressing the correct arrow during "go" trials.
A control group completed five non-incentivized runs of
the task so that practice and depletion effects could be
taken into account. Behavioral results demonstrated a
linear effect of incentive on stopping times, where higher
incentives induced faster (more efficient) stopping times
(p < .05). Preliminary neuroimaging results show that the
stopping network (including inferior frontal gyrus,
anterior cingulate, and pre-supplementary motor area) is
recruited during "stop" versus "go" trials, and with
additional data currently being collected, we will
determine how this brain activity changes as a function of
incentive. These results support the idea that reward is
not always opposed to self-control, and in fact can
improve it under some conditions. This finding is difficult
to reconcile with dual process models, which describe
reward and self-control as being in opposition. This
instead suggests that explicit rewards may upregulate the
"value" of self-control. Additional functional magnetic
resonance imaging data are currently being collected to
test this hypothesis further, and these neuroimaging
results will be discussed.

H-43 *SANS Poster Award Winner
NEURAL MARKERS OF DAILY SELF-CONTROL
FAILURE IN CHRONIC DIETERS Richard B. Lopez*,
Wilhelm Hofmann**, Dylan D. Wagner*, William M. Kelley*,
and Todd F. Heatherton*; *Department of Psychological &
Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755,
USA.; **Department of Psychology, University of Cologne,
Germany - Prior studies have consistently shown that selfregulatory depletion increases the likelihood of
subsequent self-control failure. Recent imaging work has
proposed that these depletion effects may arise from
increased activity in the brain's reward systems (e.g.,
ventral striatum; orbitofrontal cortex, or OFC),
demonstrating that chronic dieters, when depleted,
exhibit such activity in response to appetizing food cues.
In the current study, our objective was to determine if
food cue related activity following depletion is predictive
of self-control failure in everyday life. To this end, we
combined functional neuroimaging and experience
sampling methods. Thirty-nine, right-handed female
dieters first participated in a functional MRI (fMRI)
session, which consisted of an attentional control task
(previously shown to deplete self-regulatory capacity),
followed by a food cue reactivity task that used a rapid,
event-related design. After the fMRI session, participants
carried mobile devices for a one-week long sampling of
their daily eating behaviors. Several times a day and at
random, non-overlapping intervals, participants were
signaled to report their desires for food, whether or not
they had given in to their desires and already ate, and if
so, the quantity of the desired food they consumed.
Regression analyses revealed that post-depletion activity
in the left OFC during exposure to appetizing food cues
predicted food desire strength, enactment of desires, and
amount eaten in the subsequent week. Additionally,
activity
in
a
region
of
ventral
anterior
cingulate/ventromedial prefrontal cortex positively
tracked with enactment of desires and amount eaten.
These findings provide preliminary evidence of neural
markers of real world self-control failure in chronic
dieters. They are also suggestive of individual differences
in food specific reward signals, which may account for
why some dieters are less likely to resist temptations to
eat and restrain their eating behavior.

H-44
THE MODERATING ROLE OF CULTURE IN THE
RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN
THE
DOPAMINE
RECEPTOR GENE (DRD4) AND NOVELTY SEEKING
Sarah Huff, Anthony King, Carolyn Yoon, Steven Tompson,
Israel Liberzon, Shinobu Kitayama; All authors are affiliated
with the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. - Although
considerable research has focused on the hypothesis that
carriers of a 7-repeat allele of the dopamine receptor gene
(DRD4) are higher in novelty seeking compared to noncarriers, supportive evidence for the hypothesis is
surprisingly weak. In the present study, we examined the
73	  

	  

relationship by investigating ethnicity and gender as
potential moderators. We administered the Novelty
Seeking subscale of the Temperament and Character
Inventory (TCI) to 194 European American and 204 East
Asian college students. European American students had
to have been born in and spent their entire lives in the
United States. East Asian participants had to have been
born in East Asia and spent less than ten years in the
United States. Upon completion of surveys, individuals
provided saliva samples to be genotyped. They were
subsequently grouped based on presence or absence of
the 7- or 2-repeat alleles of DRD4 (both of which are
associated with higher dopamine signaling capacity
relative to 4-repeat alleles). Across all participants, there
was a significant relationship between presence of the 7or 2-repeat alleles and lower novelty seeking. In addition,
we found a moderating effect of social orientation in the
relationship between DRD4 and novelty seeking. These
findings suggest that ethnicity and cultural orientation
may help to explain some of the inconsistencies in
previous research. Future directions include a polygenic
approach to studying the relationship between dopamine
and novelty seeking. Implications for cultural
neuroscience are discussed.
H-45
OXYTOCIN ENHANCES HUMAN OPTIMISM Yina Ma
(1,2), Yi Liu (1), Chenbo Wang (1), Shihui Han (1);
Department of Psychology, PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for
Brain Research, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871;
Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA - People are often optimistic
when making predictions about their future as they
update beliefs about their future to a greater extent in
response to desirable information than to undesirable
information (i. e., an optimistic bias). The present study
examined the role of oxytocin in generation of optimistic
beliefs by testing its effects on updating desirable and
undesirable information. In a double blind, placebocontrolled between-subjects design, 60 male participants
received intranasal administration of placebo or oxytocin
and estimated their personal probability of experiencing
80 different adverse life events. Participants were then
informed of the average probability of each event and
were asked to estimate their probability of encountering
these 80 events again. We assessed whether participants
used the desirable (i.e. average probability better than
expected) or undesirable (i.e. average probability worse
than expected) information to update their predictions.
We first found an optimistic bias in belief updating across
the place and oxytocin groups, i.e., participants changed
their beliefs more toward desirable than undesirable
information. Interestingly, oxytocin treatment enhanced
the optimistic bias compared to placebo treatment. This
provides the first evidence that oxytocin affects belief
formation by increasing the optimistic tendency.
Moreover, we showed that the oxytocin effect on belief
updating was induced by the increased belief updating in
response to desirable information whereas oxytocin
treatment did not influence belief updating towards
undesirable information. Our findings reveal a functional

role of oxytocin in the optimistic bias, which is different
from dopamine that increases optimistic bias by
impairing the ability to update belief in response to
undesirable information. Thus oxytocin and dopamine
modulate the generation of the optimistic beliefs through
differential mechanisms.
H-46
FACTORS LEADING TO ATTITUDE-BEHAVIOR
DIVERGENCE IN ADVERTISING AMONG WOMEN
Benjamin C. Gunter, UCLA; Stephanie Vezich, UCLA;
Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA - Self-reported attitudes are
often unreliable predictors of behavior. Although
attitudes about contentious social and political issues may
be well informed and strongly held, numerous
environmental and biological complexities can lead to
discrepant behavior. We explored this phenomenon in the
domain of advertising. Advertisers portray women in
various roles in their campaigns in order to appeal to
specific demographics. The industry is diversifying its
campaigns in response to changing attitudes about
hypersexualized portrayals of women, but conventionally
successful strategies continue to be met with success. In
order to explain the mixed results of such strategies, we
used fMRI to examine the neural responses of 28 female
adults to five common portrayals of women in
advertising (aspirational beauty, businesswomen, normal,
traditional roles, and hypersexualized) against a common,
non-human baseline of car images. Following each image
presentation, participants reported how much they liked
the image on a scale ranging from 1 (dislike) to 4 (like).
We contrasted each of the portrayals to the car baseline
and directly contrasted two portrayals (hypersexualized
and traditional/domestic) against each other, in line with
our hypotheses and participants' self-reported attitudes
about gender roles. Activation from these contrasts was
extracted in regions of interest related to valuative
processing, including ventral striatum and orbitofrontal
cortex. Although a strong majority of participants (82%)
identified the hypersexualized portrayals as their least
favorite (mean liking 2.09), these images were the only
portrayals that reliably elicited activation in the reward
network. In addition, participants were slowest to
respond to questions about the hypersexualized
portrayals. The degree to which participants hesitated
when reporting their dislike for the hypersexualized
images was significantly positively correlated with
reward network activation. This slowing was further
correlated with progressive and egalitarian attitudes
about women's roles in society. These results suggest
that, in the case of women's responses to advertising
strategies, a mismatch between neural activation and
explicit attitudes can cause uncertainty when the time
comes to make a decision about a product or service.
Further analyses are pending to explore this phenomenon
and construct a mediation model.
H-47
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS FOR IMPLICIT,
EXPLICIT, AND EMPATHIC PROCESSING OF
EMOTIONAL FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Taylor J. Groth,
74	  

	  

Tien T. Tong, Jason S. Nomi, Stephanie Bastidas, Lucy J.
Troup; Colorado State University - The current study
examined how implicit, explicit, and empathic responses
to emotional facial expressions influence event-related
potentials (ERPs). Non-depressed and non-anxious
human participants viewed happy, sad, and neutral
emotional facial expressions while attempting to either
identify the gender (implicit), identify the emotional
expression (explicit), or empathize with the emotional
expression (empathic). EEG data were recorded from 19
electrodes set according to the international 10-20 system
with analysis focusing on mean amplitudes for midline
and bilateral frontal, central, and parietal electrodes.
Midline analysis showed that the vertex positive potential
(VPP; 140-200ms) amplitude was largest for sad faces
across all electrodes regardless of condition. Global
analysis showed that P3 (200-400ms) amplitudes in the
expression recognition condition differed by hemisphere
and electrode for sad and happy faces but not for neutral
faces. Finally, the global analysis also showed that P3
amplitudes for all three emotional expressions in the
empathize condition differed by hemisphere and
electrode. The results suggest that the early perception of
emotional expression across all manipulations is
represented by increased midline amplitude of the VPP
while processes such as expression recognition and
empathizing with expressions are represented by
differences in P3 amplitudes across hemispheres and
electrodes.
H-48
PREDICTED QUALITY OF LIFE IS CORRELATED
WITH ALPHA ASYMMETRIES IN FRONTAL AND
PARIETAL REGIONS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN Jeff
Davis, California State University Long Beach; Kristen
Damron, California State University Long Beach; Mary Beal,
California State University Long Beach - Prediction is one of
the central elements of behavioral control. Current
theories suggest predictive learning evolved as a
mechanism of early detection of threats to life and,
simultaneously, as a mechanism to optimally manage a
body's use of finite energy resources. Researchers have
found that prediction (or predictive processing) is
extensively connected with a range of cognitive and
motor processes. Given its importance, this study
examines how a prediction about one's future quality of
life might be correlated with neural responses to negative
and positive information. Data for this study come from
the Midlife Development in the United States survey
(MIDUS). The MIDUS survey is a longitudinal panel
study based on a representative sample of n= 7,108 U.S.
residents that was begun in 1995-1996. The second wave
of the study was conducted between 2002 and 2005
(MIDUS II). The MIDUS II study consists of 5 sub-studies,
one of which includes an electroencephalography (EEG)
study of n = 331 participants randomly drawn from the
core sample. The age range of the sample is 36 to 84 with
a mean of 55.41 and a standard deviation of 11.12. The
EEG study measured alpha asymmetries using a 128
channel net. Participants were shown negative, positive
and neutral images on a 17 inch computer monitor. Before
the EEG study, participants were asked three questions

about their perceived quality of life (1) ten years prior to
the study, (2) currently, and (3) ten years into the future.
Participants recorded their responses using an 11-point
scale where 0 = worst possible overall life and 10 = best
possible overall life. Results show that evaluations of
quality of life in the past, present and future are
correlated with alpha asymmetries in frontal and motor
cortices. Scores on each question are positively related to
asymmetry measures indicating that participants who
rated their quality of life favorably have higher activity in
the left hemisphere. Evaluations of life in the past and
present are associated with higher brain activity
concentrated in regions that control motor planning and
processing of emotional information (P3), respectively. By
contrast, a favorable prediction about future quality of life
is correlated with higher activity in the same areas and, in
addition, areas controlling sensorimotor integration and
social perception. Surprisingly, prediction of future life
has no significant connection with activity in areas such
as the prefrontal cortex. In conclusion, prediction about
future quality of life might have a greater impact on brain
functioning than perspectives on past and present life.
This finding accords well with arguments proposing that
prediction is fundamentally driven by motor processes.
H-49
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
MODULATES
MPFC
CONSISTENCY UNDERLYING IMPLICIT AND
EXPLICIT SELF-REFERENTIAL PROCESSING Pin-Hao
A. Chen 1, Dylan D. Wagner 1, Joseph M. Moran 2,3, William
W. Kelley 1, Todd F. Heatherton 1; 1 Department of
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH.; 2 Center for Brain Science, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA.; 3 U.S. Army Natick Soldier Research,
Development, and Engineering Center, Natick, MA.; - The
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) engages robustly in selfreferential processing tasks (Kelley et al., 2002; Mitchell et
al., 2006; Moran et al., 2013), and also activates when
participants process self-relevant information implicitly
(Moran et al., 2009). This finding suggests the possibility
that similar brain mechanisms subserve both explicit and
implicit self-referential processing. We therefore
examined whether MPFC activity is consistent for explicit
and implicit self-referential processing within the same
individuals. Moreover, individual differences in private
self-consciousness are associated with differences in
processing speed in self-reflection tasks (Hull et al., 1988),
suggesting that individual differences in selfconsciousness might modulate the consistency of MPFC
activity. However, to date, no study has directly tested
these hypotheses.
Twenty-seven native Chinesespeaking participants, who were also fluent in English,
were recruited for the study. In an event-related fMRI
study conducted within two months of their arrival in the
USA, participants made explicit SELF, MOTHER, and
FONT-based judgments in both English and Chinese. The
self-consciousness scale was administrated after scanning.
Six months after the initial scan, the same participants
performed an implicit self-referential task in which they
passively viewed Chinese and English words that were
SELF-relevant, NEUTRAL, or ODDBALL items
(presented in green font). Participants were instructed to
75	  

	  

press a button only when words appeared in green font
(ODDBALL). We compared MPFC activation during
explicit self judgments (extracted from SELF > MOTHER
contrast during scan 1) to MPFC activation during
implicit self judgments (extracted from SELF > NEUTRAL
contrast during scan 2). The results showed that the
correlation between explicit and implicit self-referential
processing in the native language was statistically
significant (r = 0.40, p < 0.05) whereas the correlation in
the second language was not significant (r = 0.25, p =
0.19). The participants were split into two groups based
on the median of their self-consciousness scores.
Individuals who were high in private self-consciousness
showed a stronger correlation in the native language (r =
0.72, p < 0.01) between explicit and implicit self-referential
processing than individuals who were low in selfconsciousness (r = 0.09, p = 0.76). These findings
suggested that MPFC activity is highly consistent across
both explicit and implicit self-referential processing, and
also across time. Self-consciousness might be a
moderating variable influencing the stability of selfreflection across time.
H-50
FMRI STUDY OF THE ROLE OF EMPATHY AND
EMOTIONS IN MORAL JUDGMENT OF REALWORLD SITUATIONS Vanessa Singh 1,2; Mary Helen
Immordino-Yang 2,3; Jonas Kaplan 2; Hanna Damasio 2;
Antonio Damasio 2; Dept. of Psychology, University of
Southern California; Brain and Creativity Institute, University
of Southern California;
Rossier School of Education,
University of Southern California- Neuorimaging studies
consistently find that moral judgment engages brain
structures involved in emotion processing and
perspective taking, and recent work in psychology has
demonstrated an influence of emotions such as
compassion, anger and disgust on the level of punishment
levied on a moral transgressor (DeSteno et al., 2010;
Ugazio et al., 2011). However, the neural mechanisms
underlying the influence of emotion on moral judgment
have not been investigated. Moreoever, most studies
employ abstract moral dilemmas that cannot serve as a
proxy for the dynamic contextual influences on moral
judgment of everyday life situations. To fill this gap in
both psychological and neuroscience literature, we
produced video clips depicting everyday life moral
transgressions to investigate the neural correlates of: (1)
moral judgments in the context of situations commonly
encountered in everyday life, and (2) interactions among:
the level of severity an observer attributes to an immoral
act; the moral transgressor's display of emotion during
the act; and the observer's own proneness for empathic
reactions. While inside the fMRI scanner, subjects rated
the severity of moral transgression committed by the
transgressor who displayed a happy, sad or no emotion.
Subjects rated more severely those transgressions where
the transgressor benefitted from the immoral act and
displayed a happy emotion. Transgressors who displayed
a sad emotion were judged as displaying most guilt. As
hypothesized, videos where the transgressor displayed a
happy emotion were significantly more likely to engage
brain regions involved the emotion processing, decision

making and perspective taking, and were associated with
greater increase in galvanic skin conductance. Our results
suggest that emotion and empathic tendencies can
critically influence our moral judgments.
H-51
TO ERR IS… SOCIAL: THE EFFECTS OF OXYTOCIN
ON PERFORMANCE MONITORING IN A SOCIAL
CONTEXT Ellen R.A. de Bruijn; Leiden University, Institute
of Psychology, Unit of Clinical Psychology and Leiden Institute
for Brain and Cognition, Leiden, the Netherlands; Margit I.
Ruissen; Leiden University, Institute of Psychology, Unit of
Clinical Psychology and Leiden Institute for Brain and
Cognition,
Leiden,
the
Netherlands;
Sina
Radke;
Universitätsklinikum Aachen, Aachen, Germany - The
majority of human behavior takes place in some sort of
social context. As a result, others' behavior affects ours
and our actions may also affect the people around us.
Mistakes are a good example of actions that often have
negative consequences not only for ourselves, but also for
the people we are interacting with. In a previous fRMI
study, we demonstrated that the mentalizing network
(including medial frontal cortex and posterior parietal
cortex) is more activated when we make mistakes that
have consequences for another person compared to
mistakes that only affect ourselves. I will present data
from a recent ERP study in which we investigated
whether the electrophysiological correlate of error
detection - the so-called error-related negativity (ERN) - is
differently involved in these two types of errors and
whether the hormone oxytocin modulates the
performance-monitoring processes involved. Healthy
male volunteers (N=24) participated in a double-blind
placebo-controlled cross-over study where they
performed two versions of a flanker task. Participants
were seated next to each other while EEG measurements
were obtained. In the Solo version, participants
performed the flanker task simultaneously and were told
that any errors they made only affected their own
individual bonus. In the Duo version, participants
performed the same task but were now told that errors
had negative consequences for both their own bonus and
the bonus of their co-actor. I will discuss both the
behavioral and the ERP results from this study and relate
them to existing theories on performance monitoring and
the role of oxytocin.
H-52
AUTOMATIC APPROACH IN INTERTEMPORAL
CHOICE Woyke, I. C.(1), Roelofs, K. (1,2), Monterosso, J.
R.(3,4), & Figner, B. (1,2,5); (1) Behavioural Science Institute,
Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands; (2) Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud
University Nijmegen, The Netherlands; (3) Department of
Psychology, University of Southern California, USA; (4) Brain
and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California,
USA; (5) Center for the Decision Sciences, Columbia
University, USA - Intertemporal choices between a
smaller-sooner (SS) versus a larger-later (LL) reward
require tradeoffs between reward magnitude and time of
delivery. Humans often exhibit substantial impatience in
76	  

	  

such decisions, choosing the SS even when the LL is
substantially larger. Such impulsivity is particularly
pronounced when the SS is an immediate reward
(compared to when both SS and LL are future rewards).
Behavioral and neuroscience research has shown that
immediate rewards can be characterized as being
particularly tempting and (lateral prefrontal) self-control
can be relevant to resist such temptation and choose the
LL. Currently, however, it is not yet well understood
what makes immediate rewards so attractive, i.e., which
processes are responsible for their outsized impact on
intertemporal choice. Our project investigates the role of
automatic approach associations (AAA) in impulsivity in
intertemporal choice: The main hypothesis is that
immediate rewards are associated with AAA, and can be
understood within the framework of Pavlovian vs.
instrumental conflict. To investigate AAA's role in
intertemporal choice, we combined an intertemporal
choice task with a standard paradigm previously
successfully used to study automatic approach and
avoidance in many domains, including problematic
behaviors such as substance abuse and anxiety disorders.
In our task, participants make intertemporal choices
either via pulling a joystick towards themselves or
pushing it away from themselves. Disambiguated using a
"zooming" feature, pulling the joystick is an approach
movement (the stimulus increases in size), while pushing
it away is an avoidance movement (the stimulus
decreases in size). Based on previous AAA research, we
thus predicted that if immediate reward is associated with
AAA, participants should be more likely (and faster) to
choose an immediate SS in the "pull-to-choose" condition
than the "push-to-choose" condition: If our hypothesis
about AAA towards immediate SSs is correct, the pull-tochoose condition is a congruent condition (AAA towards
SS congruent with approach movement), whereas the
push-to-choose condition is an incongruent condition
(increasing required response time and likelihood of LL
choice). Further, the difference between pull-to-choose
versus push-to-choose should be larger if the SS is an
immediate reward compared to when both SS and LL are
future rewards. Thus, our task allows us to test not only a
more general approach bias in intertemporal choice, but
also gives insights into the specificity and boundary
conditions of this effect. In a pilot study (N = 51) with a
preliminary task version, we found results supporting our
hypothesis: Participants significantly more often (and
more quickly) chose the immediate SS in the pull-tochoose compared to the push-to-choose condition.
Currently, we are collecting data in a larger sample and
with an improved task that contains also a neutral
(left/right) condition and gives additional insights into
potential mediators such as relative differences in SS/LL
amounts, and time difference between SS and LL.
Individual-differences variables such as self-reported
impulsivity and reward and punishment sensitivity are
being collected to investigate the role of person-related
moderators.
H-53
DECISION WITHOUT DELIBERATION: A ROLE FOR
AFFECT IN COMPLEX DECISION MAKING Pareezad

Zarolia, University of Denver ; Kateri McRae, University of
Denver - Affect plays a crucial role in decision-making and
recent research has made important progress towards
understanding the nature of that role (Bechara & Damsio,
2005). The purpose of the present research was to examine
the role of affect in a non-deliberative form of decisionmaking. We modified a commonly used paradigm to
compare deliberative and non-deliberative decisionmaking (Dijksterhuis, 2004) in which participants are
presented with four options each comprised of twelve
attributes, they are then instructed to either think about
the attributes or are distracted for four minutes, finally
they are asked to choose one option. In previous studies,
participants in the distraction condition choose the
objectively best option a greater percentage of the time
than those in the deliberation condition. For our
modification we introduced an Affective Deliberation
condition during which participants are instructed to
reflect on how they feel about the options rather than
critically think about them, and an Affective Distraction
condition during which participants were asked to solve
affectively evocative rather than neutral anagrams. Using
behavioral and psychophysiological measures, we tested
the hypotheses that 1) if affect plays a critical role in
optimal decision making, then emphasizing affect during
deliberation should improve quality of choice, and 2) if
affect conveys critical choice information, then
interrupting or introducing unrelated affective signals
during distraction should decrease the quality of choice.
Preliminary
results
replicate
previous
findings
demonstrating that a greater percentage of participants in
the Neutral Distraction condition chose the objectively
best choice (76.9%) as compared to the Neutral
Deliberation condition (42.9%). The results also support
the second hypothesis, with fewer participants choosing
the objectively best choice in the Affective Distraction
(53.8%) condition as compared to the Neutral Distraction
condition (76.9%). These results suggest that one role for
affect in complex decision-making is its ability to
communicate evaluations of choice-relevant attributes;
importantly, when the choice-relevant evaluations are
diluted by irrelevant affect, the quality of choice
decreases.
H-54
AN
APPETITE
FOR
CONFORMITY:
PEER
PREFERENCES SHIFT BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL
RESPONSES TO FOODS Erik C. Nook, Jamil Zaki;
Stanford University - Conformity constitutes a "strong
force" in social behavior, as it powerfully shifts people's
endorsed beliefs and preferences. However, it is unclear
just how "deeply" social norms penetrate when exerting
these effects. Here, we investigated the extent to which
social influence shifts behavioral and neural indices of
preferences for a very basic stimulus: food. Twenty-five
Stanford undergraduates were scanned with fMRI while
they rated how much they liked 150 foods. After each
trial, participants saw ratings ostensibly made by their
peers about each food. In actuality, these ratings were
manipulated to be higher than, equal to or lower than
participants' own ratings. After a delay, participants rerated each food in the absence of information about peer
77	  

	  

preferences. Controlling for their initial ratings,
participants' second ratings exhibited social influence:
they were higher for foods initially liked, as opposed to
disliked, by their peers. Further, learning that one's
ratings disagreed with those of the group was associated
with increased activity in regions associated with
cognitive control (e.g. anterior cingulate cortex) and social
cognition (e.g. precuneus). By contrast, learning that one
had agreed with the group produced activity in the
ventral striatum, an area typically associated with value
processing. Further, individual differences in agreementrelated striatal activity tracked individuals' tendency to
conform by shifting their ratings to match those of their
peers. Finally, during their second ratings, participants
engaged ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC) more
strongly when viewing foods rated highly, as opposed to
less highly, by their peers. Together, these results provide
insights into two key mechanisms underlying social
influence. First, agreement between individual and group
preferences engaged the ventral striatum, and activity in
this region predicted behavioral conformity. This finding
supports a reinforcement learning model of conformity
under which individuals value the experience of
consensus and seek it out by "tuning" their opinion to
match those of a group. Second, peer preferences
influenced vMPFC responses to foods. Given that vMPFC
is commonly associated with value computation, this
suggests that group norms modulate subjective
preferences for food via basic reward processing
mechanisms. In all, the present studies extend recent
demonstrations that social influence can modulate
preferences at both behavioral and neural levels.
Furthermore, they reveal that social influence is powerful
enough to affect food desirability. Future research should
explore how interventions aimed at promoting healthy
eating could harness the power of social norms.
H-55
WHY CLARITY OF THE LOOKING-GLASS SELF
DEPENDS ON POPULARITY Noam Zerubavel, Columbia
University; Jochen Weber, Columbia University; Niall Bolger,
Columbia University; Peter Bearman, Columbia University;
Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University - Neural mechanisms
linking social network position to accuracy of reflected
self-appraisals
It is entirely human to contemplate
how others perceive us, but what factors explain
individual differences in the accuracy of these reflected
self-appraisals? We hypothesized that popular members
of real-world social networks would more accurately
understand how their peers perceived them, and that this
relationship would be mediated by the efficiency of
neural mechanisms underlying reflected self-appraisals.
To test these predictions, we recruited two student
organizations, each comprised of 13 well-acquainted
group members. Utilizing a round-robin design, we
obtained participants' predictions about how each of their
group members would rate them on a series of traits and
those group members' actual ratings. By correlating
predicted and actual trait ratings, we computed each
group member's reflected self-appraisal accuracy. We also
utilized social network analysis to measure individuals'
popularity. Confirming our first hypothesis, popularity

was positively correlated with accuracy of reflected selfappraisals. We then used functional magnetic resonance
imaging to scan these same participants while they made
reflected (other-about-you) and direct (you-about-you)
self-appraisals. The other-about-you > you-about-you
contrast identified brain regions uniquely recruited for
reflected self-appraisals: middle temporal gyrus,
precuneus, and temporo-parietal junction. Mediation
analyses revealed that decreased activation in these brain
regions during reflected self-appraisals fully mediated the
link between popularity and reflected self-appraisal
accuracy, suggesting that popular individuals' enhanced
accuracy results from greater efficiency of neural
mechanisms underlying reflected self-appraisals. More
broadly, we provide a theoretical framework and
experimental methodology for integrating functional
neuroimaging with social network analysis to understand
individual differences in neurocognitive processes and
their interpersonal consequences.
H-56
THE HEALTH IMPACT OF SOCIAL AND AFFECTIVE
NEUROSCIENCE: NIH’S POINT OF VIEW Janine M.
Simmons, National Institute of Mental Health SANS brings
together scientists dedicated to studying the neural bases
of affective and social processes. The National Institutes
of Health (NIH) seeks to apply scientific findings to
“enhance health, lengthen life, and reduce illness and
disability.” The goals of this presentation are to articulate
how social and affective neuroscience fits within this NIH
mission, how investigators can best utilize the expertise of
NIH program officers to navigate the system, and how
NIH can help foster the career development of rising
social and affective neuroscientists. The presentation will
focus on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
and the potential for social and affective neuroscience to
impact our understanding of mental health and our
treatments for mental illness. I will discuss NIMH’s
commitment to support both basic and translational
neuroscience, discuss gaps and opportunities for funding
within the Affect, Social Behavior, & Social Cognition
Program, and provide an introduction to NIMH’s
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) project. The
presentation will also include information regarding
overlapping and distinct interests at several other NIH
institutes, including the National Cancer Institute,
National Institute on Aging, and National Institute of
General Medical Sciences.

78	  

	  

H-57
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY
OF
SELFPROTECTION: NEW INSIGHTS INTO THE ROLE OF
MOFC
IN
MOTIVATED
SELF-EVALUATIONS
Taru Flagan; Jennifer S. Beer; Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA - In contrast
to research linking MPFC to self-evaluation, research now
finds that medial orbitofrontal cortex (MOFC) is
important for motivated self-evaluations such as selfevaluations that flatter the self. One puzzle is why MOFC
shows different associations with flattering selfevaluations (Flagan & Beer, 2013). MOFC activity is
consistently associated with flattering self-evaluations but
sometimes activation is increased and other times it is
decreased (e.g., Beer et al., 2003; 2006; Beer, Lombardo, &
Bhanji, 2010; Beer & Hughes, 2010; Hughes & Beer, 2012;
2013). Flattering self-evaluations may arise because
people want to protect self-esteem but they may also arise
simply because people use incomplete information when
evaluating themselves (e.g., Chambers & Windschitl,
2004; Taylor & Brown, 1988). Do the neural mechanisms
of flattering self-evaluations depend on whether the
evaluations are driven by self-protective mechanisms? To
address this question, the functional connectivity of
MOFC was examined in order to determine if the
different associations between MOFC and flattering selfevaluations arise in predictable but distinct networks
depending on whether they are used to protect selfesteem. Methods. Psychophysiological interaction (PPI)
analyses were conducted on previously published
datasets to investigate the functional connectivity of
MOFC activation associated with (a) self-evaluations
made in response to self-esteem threat (Hughes & Beer,
2012; 2013) and (b) self-evaluations made in the absence of
threat (Beer & Hughes, 2010). Two of the datasets used
the exact same measure of flattering self-evaluations but
only one introduced the need for self-protection. The
third dataset was included for comparison with the other
two because of its precision in identifying the cognitive
mechanism underlying self-evaluations that was
associated with MOFC activation. This study combined
Signal Detection Theory with fMRI and found that MOFC
mediates the decision threshold for attributing things to
the self (Hughes & Beer, 2012). MOFC seed regions were
created as 5mm radius spheres around the peak found in
group analyses of each dataset. PPI regressors were
contrasted in a GLM and mixed effects analyses were
performed for each dataset.
Results. The analyses
supported the prediction that MOFC activation
underlying self-evaluations arises from different neural
networks depending on whether the self-evaluations are
used to achieve self-protection. When self-esteem is under
attack, MOFC activation shows less positive covariation
with middle frontal gyrus and more positive covariation
with different regions of the striatum depending on
whether self-protection requires flattery (e.g., caudate) or
modesty (putamen). In contrast, functional connectivity of
MOFC activation associated with self-evaluations that are
flattering but not used for self-protection shows
covariation with a completely distinct set of neural
regions. Conclusions. Although people most often report
flattering self-evaluations, the underlying neural systems

differ depending on the motivation underlying the
flattery. Functional connectivity between MOFC,
striatum, and middle frontal gyrus may support selfevaluations used to protect self-esteem in the face of
threat. Furthermore, functional connectivity between
MOFC and striatal subregions may reflect whether a shift
to a more conservative or liberal decision threshold for
self-evaluations will be most rewarding in the presence of
threat.

H-58
ETHICS OR EMPATHY? FOCUSING ON DIFFERENT
MOTIVATIONS FOR ALTRUISM ACTIVATES
DISTINCT COMPONENTS OF THE SOCIAL
COGNITIVE NETWORK
Cendri Hutcherson, Division of Humanities and Social
Sciences, Caltech; Antonio Rangel, Computational and Neural
Systems & Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, Caltech
- The psychological and neural mechanisms underlying
generosity (sacrificing for others’ benefit in the absence of
strategic or selfish motives) remain poorly understood.
Do people act generously because they care about
conforming to social norms that promote generosity (i.e.
ethics), because they care about others’ happiness (i.e.
empathy), or both? How does the brain represent these
different considerations? To investigate the behavioral
and neural correlates of ethical and empathic motives for
generosity, participants made a series of choices about
different monetary tradeoffs between themselves and an
anonymous partner under three instructional conditions:
respond naturally, focus on ethical/moral considerations,
or focus on their partner’s feelings. After completing the
choice task, participants made two different subjective
ratings of the choices they had seen in the choice task: 1)
the ethical obligation to accept or reject each tradeoff, and
2) how their partner would feel if they accepted or
rejected each tradeoff. These ratings allowed us to
examine neural representations of the subjective
perception of each attribute during choice. Behaviorally,
focusing on ethical and empathic reasons for choice both
increased generosity, with empathy instructions inducing
significantly greater generosity overall. Neurally, we
found distinct patterns of activation during each
condition. Compared to natural response, focusing on
ethics increased the correlation between behaviorally
expressed preferences and regions of the dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex and temporoparietal junction. In
contrast, focusing on one’s partner’s feelings increased the
representation of the partner’s payoff in regions of the
superior temporal gyrus and insula. The association
between these same regions and subjective preferences
also increased. Finally, instructions to focus on ethics or
empathy both decreased neural evidence of conflict and
self-control during generous behavior compared to
natural response trials. Taken together, these findings
suggest that generosity may result from a mixture of
different motives, supported by computations in distinct
brain regions. Moreover, although activation of either
motive decreases the need for self-control to choose
generously, empathic motives may be more effective
79	  

	  

overall.

H-59
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERSPECTIVE TAKING
IN
EVALUATING
SOCIAL
INTERACTIONS
Sanda Dolcos, Yuta Katsumi, Gina Giase, Suhkyung Kim, &
Florin Dolcos; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Effective social interactions require the ability to evaluate
other people's actions and intentions, and subtle
nonverbal cues conveyed through body language or
physical touch, such as a handshake or a gentle touch on
the shoulder, can play an important role in these
evaluations. In everyday life people typically evaluate
others' actions and intentions while directly engaged in
social interactions, but also while watching social
interactions between other people. Such evaluative
judgments may be performed either from the own (ME)
or another (OTHER) person's perspective. However, little
is known about the impact of these perspectives on
evaluative responses in social settings, and the associated
neural correlates. In the present study, fMRI data were
recorded while 20 participants (10 females) viewed and
rated videos of guest-host interactions in a business
setting, taking either the ME (for same-sex guest) or the
OTHER (for other-sex guest) perspective. The host
displayed behaviors that either encouraged (Approach
condition) or discouraged (Avoid condition) further social
interactions. Half of the trials were preceded by a
handshake initiated by the host as part of the initial
greeting. Watching social interactions from the ME
perspective was associated with increased activity in a
host of brain regions from the self-referential processing
network, including prefrontal and temporal areas, insula,
dorsal and ventral striatum, anterior cingulate, and the
amygdala. Watching Approach interactions from the ME
perspective was associated with increased activity in the
superior frontal and parietal areas, while watching Avoid
interactions was associated with increased activity in
medial and lateral prefrontal areas and anterior cingulate.
Moreover, watching social interactions preceded by
Handshake from the ME perspective was associated with
increased activity in the left amygdala and nucleus
accumbens, suggesting a more positive evaluation of
handshake from the ME than the OTHER perspective.
Overall, these findings have relevance for understanding
the neural correlates of perspective taking in social
interactions, and for understanding alterations associated
with clinical conditions in which interpretation of
affective social clues is dysfunctional (e.g., autism and
social phobia).
H-60
NEGATIVE MOOD DIMINISHES REAPPRAISAL
SUCCESS Seth Kallman, Noam Zerubavel, Kevin Ochsner;
(All of the above are members of the Psychology Department at
Columbia University) - The connection between negative
affect and increased alcohol consumption has been well
established both in popular culture and the scientific
literature. This dysregulated behavior, sometimes referred
to as 'drinking to cope,' might occur for several reasons.

On one hand, negative affect may increase the bottom-up
incentive salience of alcohol cues. Alternatively, it may
decrease peoples' ability to exercise effective top-down
self-regulation. To shed light on these possibilities, we
had healthy college students view pictures of alcohol and
rate their urge to drink the depicted beverages. They were
asked to do this while either looking naturally or using
cognitive reappraisal to reinterpret the stimuli in terms of
their negative consequences. Critically, they made these
judgments following either a neutral or a negative mood
induction. This design allowed us to examine the effects
of negative mood on natural responses, regulated
responses,
and
the
difference
between
them
(operationalized as 'regulation success'). The results
showed that participants were able to successfully use
reappraisal to reduce their reported desire to drink the
alcoholic beverages. However, there was a significant
interaction with mood, such that regulation success
significantly declined in the negative mood condition.
Interestingly, the majority of participants held the
metacognitive belief that the negative mood increased
their ability to think of negative consequences. While this
could have conceivably aided reappraisal, our results
suggested otherwise. Overall, this study provides
experimental evidence that negative affect can impair
cognitive reappraisal.
H-61
SWEET-CHEEKS VS. PEA-BRAIN: EMBODIMENT,
VALENCE AND TASK ALL INFLUENCE THE TIME
COURSE OF THE LPP IN EMOTIONAL LANGUAGE
Benau, E.M. (1), Johnson, E.K. (1), Siakaluk, P. (2), O'Hare, A.
(3), Gregerson, S. (1), Fennel, A. (1), Jamison, A (1). &
Atchley, R.A (1).; University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA;
University of Northern British Columbia, Prince George, BC,
Canada; University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, Dartmouth,
MA, USA - Extant studies have established that, in
healthy individuals, compliments are processed faster
and more reliably than insults. However, it is not fully
established what can enhance or hinder the processing of
this information. Words that are embodied, or refer to the
human body, have demonstrated more rapid and accurate
processing than words that are unembodied, but these
studies have been largely compared insults to neutral
stimuli. The present study synthesizes and extends this
research to examine the role of embodiment in insults,
compliments, and neutral stimuli using event-related
potentials (ERP). While electroencephalographic activity
was recorded, undergraduate volunteers completed two
tasks: one in which they determined if a visually
presented word was an insult and one in which they
determined if a presented word was a compliment. Our
ERP analyses focused on the late positive potential (LPP)
component. Consistent with past research, we trisected
the LPP into an early (400-500ms), middle (500-600ms),
and late (600-700ms) component, and then ran a 2 (task) X
3 (time window) X 3 (stimulus type) X 2 (embodiment)
ANOVA. The results showed that compliments and
insults generated a significantly larger LPP than neutral
stimuli, indicating a reliable LPP response was elicited.
There was both a time window X stimulus type and a
time window X embodiment interaction such that, in the
80	  

	  

early time window only, compliments generated larger
LPPs than insults and embodied words generated a larger
LPP than unembodied words. Finally, there was a
significant time window X stimulus type X task
interaction. In the compliment detection task, the LPP for
compliments was significantly larger than the LPP for
insults in the early time window but did not differ from
insults in the middle or late time windows; the LPP to
neutral stimuli remained significantly smaller in each
time window. This was not entirely consistent in the
insult detection task: the LPP to compliments generated a
significantly larger LPP in the early time window, but did
not differ from insults in the middle window, and were
significantly smaller than the LPP to insults in the late
time window. Concurrently, neutral stimuli did not differ
from insults in the early time window, were smaller than
both insults and neutral stimuli in the middle time
window, and did not differ from compliments in the late
time window. In sum, when insults were the target of
focus for the experiment, they generated a larger LPP
later while compliments generated larger LPPs in the
early time window regardless of task; compliments were
processed faster and more reliably than insults as were
embodied words compared to unembodied words. The
present findings indicate that the time course for
processing compliments and insults may be influenced by
task instruction, but it is not yet clear why or how.
Further research is needed to better understand the
function of the time course of the LPP, the processing of
insults and compliments, and what role embodiment may
play in both.
H-62
AFFIRMING CORE VALUES PREVENTS OVERCLAIMING SELF-KNOWLEDGE John Lurquin University of Colorado Boulder; Laura Shiley - University of
Colorado Boulder; Joanna K. Hubbard - University of Colorado
Boulder - When we receive a threat to our self-esteem, we
respond in various ways. One way we appear to bolster
our self-esteem is by claiming and believing we possess
knowledge that we do not. In the current research we
measured this over-claiming bias after participants
received bogus negative feedback about their intelligence.
Results show that working memory capacity predicts this
over-claiming tendency such that those with low working
memory capacities over-claimed more following the
negative feedback. This was especially true for
participants who experienced negative mood from the
feedback. However, these patterns did not occur among
participants who were exposed to a self-affirmation
intervention prior to the bogus intelligence feedback.
These participants were asked to affirm two core values
by choosing from a list which were most important to
them (e.g., relationships with family) and writing about
them for five minutes. In past research, this intervention
has protected participants from gender and racial
stereotype threat. In the current study, we show that
affirming core values can protect participants from threats
to their self-esteem that typically lead to negative mood
and over-claiming self-knowledge

H-63
PREDICTION
ERROR
GOVERNS
PHARMACOLOGICALLY INDUCED AMNESIA FOR
LEARNED FEAR Dieuwke Sevenster 1, Tom Beckers 1,2,
Merel Kindt 1; 1 University of Amsterdam, 2 University of
Leuven - Retrieval of a consolidated memory returns it to a
plastic state, during which the memory is prone to
modification. This process of reconsolidation does not
necessarily occur when a memory is reactivated. Recently,
it has been proposed that reconsolidation is triggered only
when learning takes place, in order to integrate new
information in the initial memory presentation (memory
updating). According to general associative learning
models, learning takes place when there is a discrepancy
between actual and expected events (prediction error; PE).
Even though it has frequently been suggested, there is no
experimental evidence that PE is a necessary condition for
reconsolidation. So far, PE could only be inferred from
effective reconsolidation without an independent
assessment of PE driven learning. In a human fear
conditioning paradigm we investigated the role of PE in
reconsolidation. Fear acquisition took place on day 1,
memory reactivation followed by propranolol (40 mg)
administration on day 2, and extinction learning and
reinstatement test on day 3. PE was assessed by means of
a change in threat expectancy ratings, while fear
expression was measured with the fear-potentiated
startle. Reinforcement schedules of acquisition and
reactivation were manipulated such that reactivation
resulted in a negative PE (omission of a predicted
reinforcement), no PE, or a positive PE (unpredicted
reinforcement). Propranolol eliminated the startle fear
response 24 h after reactivation only when either a
Negative PE or a Positive PE was present during memory
retrieval. PE serves as a marker of memory
destabilization, independent from the process of
reconsolidation itself.
H-64
A TRAIT AND AGENT MEMORY CODE IS
REPRESENTED IN THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX Frank Van Overwalle, Ning Ma, Elien Heleven,
Laurens Van Der Cruyssen - Vrije Universiteit Brussel - The
medial Prefrontal Cortex (mPFC) is critically involved in
inference about the traits of the self and others. We
investigated whether the mPFC also represents the neural
code for traits and the agents (or social groups) that
possess these traits. To localize these codes, we used
fMRI-adaptation, which is a rapid suppression of
neuronal responses upon repeated presentation of the
same underlying stimulus, in this case, the implied trait
or agent. Participants had to infer an agent's trait from
brief trait-implying behavioral descriptions. In each trial,
the critical (target) sentence was preceded by a sentence
(prime) that implied the same trait or no trait at all, and
which involved the same agent or not. The results
revealed robust adaptation in the ventral mPFC only.
More importantly, the mPFC areas representing the
memory code of agents and traits were adjacent to each
other, but did not overlap. An additional fMRI study
further demonstrated that this trait code was independent
81	  

	  

from valence, as positively and negatively valenced object
descriptions did not show this adaptation pattern.
H-65
IMAGINING
AN
EMOTIONAL
FUTURE:
AMYGDALA
LESIONS
IMPAIR
AFFECTIVE
PROSPECTION Elizabeth Race (VA Boston Healthcare
System and Boston University School of Medicine); Margaret
Keane (Wellesley College and VA Boston Healthcare System);
Mieke Verfaellie (VA Boston Healthcare System and Boston
University School of Medicine) - Many imagined events
have emotional content and elicit emotional responses.
Despite the centrality of emotion to prospection, limited
work has examined how emotion is integrated into
simulations of the future or what neural mechanisms
support affective prospection. One possibility is that the
amygdala supports emotional aspects of prospection in a
similar manner as it supports emotional aspects of
memory. Indeed, a recent neuroimaging study reported
amygdala activity when participants imagined positive
future events (Sharot et al., 2007). In the current study,
we adopt a lesion-deficit approach to test the hypothesis
that the amygdala plays a critical role in affective
prospection. We first re-analyzed data collected in a
recent future-thinking study by Race et al. (2012) to
examine the ability of amnesic patients with medial
temporal lobe (MTL) damage that either included the
amygdala or spared the amygdala to produce detailed
descriptions of past and future events (e.g., a visit from a
close friend). The richness of patients' descriptions was
measured using an objective scoring of the number and
nature of narrative details. Patients with amygdala
damage produced fewer emotional details when
projecting themselves into the future and the past
compared to amnesic patients without amygdala damage,
even though both groups produced similar numbers of
non-emotional details. We then examined whether the
amygdala is particularly important for imagining
emotionally-charged scenarios (e.g., winning the lottery)
by examining the ability of the two patients groups to
describe positive events situated in the future and the
past. Patients with amygdala damage produced sparser
descriptions of positive past and future events compared
to patients without amygdala damage, and their
descriptions contained fewer emotional and nonemotional details.
These results suggest that the
amygdala plays a critical role in the emotional aspects of
mental simulation.

though they form a cohesive group with the product's
manufacturer and the other individuals who use the
brand. Because of the efficacy of this strategy, many
companies actively work to associate their products with
existing social groups, attempting to join the group and
"convince" its members that it is normative for them to
use and enjoy the product. Although prevalent across
companies and product types, this strategy may present a
number of problems when used by alcohol manufactures.
In the current studies, we utilized event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) to examine the underlying attentional
processes instantiated by this marketing strategy and
their relation to real-world drinking behavior. ERPs were
measured during an oddball task (using beer, water,
ingroup, and outgroup-related images as the oddballs)
and recent drinking behavior was assessed both at this
initial experimental session and one-month later during
an online follow-up. Using ERPs, we obtained both
deliberate (P3) and spontaneous (N1) measures of
attentional processing. Across studies, we found that
participants' neural responses to alcohol (P3) and
ingroup-associated alcohol (N1) were related to past
drinking behavior. Strikingly, these attentional biases
were also able to predict drinking behavior one month
later; and could account for the change in drinking that
occurred between the lab session and the one-month
follow-up. Together, these studies demonstrate that
associating alcohol with an important ingroup instantiates
a variety of attentional biases. In combination with our
previous behavioral work, this suggests that the
advertised product takes on many of the characteristics of
the ingroup, changing alcohol-related attitudes and
beliefs
and
automatically
attracting
heightened
attentional processing. Although innocuous for some
products, these effects have a number of disturbing
ramifications for dangerous products like alcohol.

	  

H-66
ON THE NEURAL PROCESSES INSTANTIATED BY
INGROUP-ASSOCIATED PRODUCT MARKETING:
THE CASE OF ALCOHOL ADVERTISING Chris
Loersch, University of Colorado; Tiffany A. Ito, University of
Colorado; Bruce D. Bartholow, University of Missouri - One
prevalent marketing strategy is to create a "brand
community" in which a product's consumers feel as
82	  

	  

