2010 Social and Affective Neuroscience Conference 
Schedule‐at‐a‐glance 
 
  
Friday, October 29 
3:00‐5:30PM   
5:30‐7:00PM   
7:00‐9:00PM   
 

Registration 
Session A: Keynote Address: Richard Davidson 
Welcome Reception 

Saturday, October 30 
8:00‐9:00AM   
9:00‐10:15AM 
10:15‐10:45AM 
10:45‐12:00PM 
12:00‐1:30PM  
1:30‐2:45PM   
2:45‐4:15PM   
4:15‐5:30PM   
6:00‐7:30PM   
 

Continental Breakfast 
Session B: Reward in its social context
Coffee Break 
Session C: Social Cognition 
Break for Lunch 
Session D: Emotion 
Session E: Poster Session 1 
Session F: Perspective  
Session G: Keynote Address: Gary Berntson 

Sunday, October 31 
8:00‐9:00AM   
9:00‐10:15AM 
10:15‐10:45AM 
10:45‐12:00PM 
12:00‐1:30PM  
1:30‐3:00PM   
3:00‐4:15PM 

Continental Breakfast 
Session H: The brain outside the scanner: Linking social neuroscience data with 
real‐world outcomes  
Coffee Break 
Session I: Decision Making  
Break for Lunch 
Session J: Poster Session 2 
Session K: At the frontier of cultural neuroscience  

Social and Affective Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting 2010

 
 
October 29‐ 31, W Chicago‐ City Center 
Chicago, IL 

Organizing Committee 

David Amodio, New York University 
Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin 
Joan Chiao, Northwestern University 
William Cunningham, The Ohio State University 
Matthew Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles 
Jason Mitchell, Harvard University 
Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University  
 

 

[2] 

Presentations 
Session A: Keynote Address
Friday, October 29, 2010
5:30 PM - 7:30 PM

Richard Davidson, University of Wisconsin, Madison

Session B: Reward in its social context
Saturday, October 30, 2010
9:00 AM – 10:30 AM

Mauricio Delgado, Rutgers University
Jamil Zaki, Harvard University
Caroline Zink, National Institute of Mental Health
Antonio Rangel, California Institute of Technology

Abstracts
Tracking reward-related responses in the human striatum under different
social contexts Mauricio R. Delgado, Rutgers University Research  in  non‐human  animals, 
complemented  by  an  array  of  human  neuroimaging  studies,  has  delineated  a  basic  neurocircuitry  underlying 
reward‐related  learning  and  motivated  behaviors.  Central  to  this  circuit  is  the  role  of  the  striatum  ‐  a 
heterogeneous structure in terms of connectivity and functionality ‐ as an interface for the processing of motor 
and motivational information. While the striatum has been implicated in different aspects of reward processing in 
basic  paradigms  that  assess  the  acquisition  or  expression  of  reward  contingencies  (e.g.,  learning  that  a  button 
press leads to a reward), recent research has begun to probe the involvement of the striatum in more complex 
motivated behaviors typically displayed in human society (e.g., learning that an individual is trustworthy and that 
interactions  with  that  individual  will  likely  lead  to  a  reward).   This  talk  will  focus  on  the  influence  of  dynamic 
social factors on neural mechanisms underlying reward‐related processing.  Specifically, we will discuss how the 
nature of social interactions creates a context that modulates activity in regions such as the human striatum, as 
well as the subjective perception or value assigned to positive and negative outcomes. 

Social influence modulates reward-related neural activity  Jamil Zaki, Harvard
University- Individuals demonstrate a pronounced tendency to conform to the expectations, beliefs, and opinions 
of others.  Although such social influence has been a topic of interest in psychology since the 1930s, it has often 
proven difficult to distinguish conformity based on true modification of one’s attitudes (private acceptance) from 
mere public compliance with a group norm.  The study I will describe here introduces a novel method that uses 
functional neuroimaging to document true private acceptance of a group norm. In the last decade, activity in two 
targets  of  the  dopaminergic  system—the  nucleus  accumbens  (NAcc)  and  orbitofrontal  cortex  (OFC)—has  been 
reliably  associated  with  the  subjective  value  attributed  to  a  stimulus.    Here,  we  took  advantage  of  this  well 
characterized  relationship  to  examine  the  effects  of  group  norms  on  the  neural  encoding  of  value.    Male 
participants rated the attractiveness of female faces and subsequently learned how a group of peers rated those 
same  faces.    In  some  cases,  peer  ratings  of  individual  faces  were  much  more  or  much  less  attractive  than 
participants’ own ratings.  Participants were then scanned using fMRI while they rated each face a second time.  
These  second  ratings  were  influenced  by  group  norms,  such  that  participants  rated  faces  as  more  or  less 
attractive, in line with their peers’ prior ratings.  More importantly, social influence altered the response of in the 
OFC  and  NAcc:  both  of  these  regions  were  more  strongly  engaged  by  faces  peers  has  rated  as  attractive,  as 
compared to unattractive, even though participants had initially rated these faces as equally attractive. Additional 
analyses demonstrated that peer ratings modulated activity in specific regions of the OFC and NAcc that respond 
generally to reward (including monetary rewards).  These data suggest that social influence is sufficient to cause 

 

[3] 

core  modifications  of  the  value  assigned to a stimulus, and  elucidate one mechanism  through which the beliefs 
and attitudes of one person come to shape the mind of another.

Ventral striatal responses to social status information in humans- Caroline
Zink, National Institute of Mental Health­ Social hierarchies are ubiquitous in our environment, and they define 
implicit  expectations  that  drive  appropriate  social  behavior  and  impact  motivation  and  health.    Properly 
identifying  and  responding  to  social  status  cues  is  essential  for  successful  social  interactions,  suggesting  that 
neural mechanisms exist to process such status cues and ascribe value to them.  In a series of fMRI experiments 
investigating human social status perception, we created an explicit social hierarchy based on incidental skill in 
the  context  of  an  interactive  game.    In  both  stable  and  unstable  hierarchical  settings,  several  brain  regions—
including occipitoparietal cortex and ventral striatum—demonstrated greater activity when viewing/interacting 
with  a  superior  individual  compared  to  an  inferior  individual.    These  results  are  indicative  of  greater 
perceptual/attentional processing and value/saliency associated with the higher ranked individual, in excellent 
agreement  with  data  showing  that  monkeys  place  greater  value  on  higher  ranked  conspecifics  than  on  lower 
ranked.    Furthermore,  in  the  unstable  hierarchical  setting,  the  ‘hierarchical  value’  associated  with  outcomes 
affecting  social  status  made  a  highly  significant  and  unique  contribution  to  ventral  striatal  activity  that  is  of 
comparable magnitude to that elicited by monetary reward.  Interestingly in non‐human primates, status‐related 
value  assignment  is  influenced  by  one’s  own  hierarchical  rank.    Therefore,  in  a  separate  fMRI  study  we 
investigated how one’s own social rank (subjective socioeconomic status) influences ventral striatal responses to 
social status information.  Subjects were presented with photographs of two individuals, one of higher and one of 
lower  socioeconomic  status,  and  were  required  to  judge  to  which  individual  a  visually  presented  statement 
pertained.   We found that one’s own socioeconomic status was significantly correlated with the level of ventral 
striatal  activity  elicited  by  statements  judged  as  pertaining  to  high  status  individuals  in  contrast  to  low  status.  
More  specifically,  subjects  with  high  subjective  status  elicited  more  ventral  striatal  activity  when  making  high 
status judgments, and subjects with low subjective status elicited more ventral striatal activity when making low 
status judgments.  These data suggest that the value attributed to social status information is dependent on one’s 
own  relative  hierarchical  rank,  consistent  with  the  non‐human  primate  literature.      Together  these  findings 
advance our understanding of the value/saliency associated with social status cues and the neural mechanisms 
underlying appropriate social interactions and motivation. 

Value computations during social decision-making Antonio Rangel, California Institute
of Technology Little is known about the neural networks supporting value computation during complex social 
decisions. We present the results of two different human fMRI studies designed to investigate this question. In the 
first study subjects made real donations to different charities. We found that the BOLD signal in ventral medial 
prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) correlated with the subjective value of voluntary donations. Furthermore, the region 
of the VMPFC identified showed considerable overlap with regions that have been shown to encode for the value 
of  basic  rewards  at  the  time  of  choice,  suggesting  that  it  might  serve  as  a  common  valuation  system  during 
decision  making.  In  addition,  functional  connectivity  analyses  indicated  that  the  value  signal  in  VMPFC  might 
integrate inputs from networks, including the anterior insula and posterior superior temporal cortex, which are 
thought to be involved in social cognition. In the second study subjects made decisions about monetary transfers 
to other subjects that vary in their cost and benefits. Importantly, the decisions of the subjects were implemented 
only with 60% percent probability. We found that the BOLD signal in the VMPFC at the time of decision correlated 
with  behavioral  measures  of  the  subject's  value  for  the  donations.  Interestingly,  we  found  that  there  were  two 
types of subjects: (1) subjects with seemingly altruistic preferences, and (2) subjects with seemingly procedural 
preferences.  The  first  group  encoded  the  value  of  the  transfers  for  others  both  at  the  time  of  choice  and  at  the 
time  of  outcome.  In  contrast,  the  other  group  encoded  the  transfers  for  others  only  at  the  decision  stage,  and 
showed positive activity in the ventral striatum and the VMPFC when they were not implemented. In addition, the 
procedural  group,  but  not  the  altruistic  group,  exhibited  an  increase  in  activity  in  an  area  of  dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) that exhibited functional connectivity. 

 
 
 
 

[4] 

Session C: Social Cognition
Saturday October 30
10:45 AM – 12:00 PM
Tiffany Ito, University of Colorado
Mina Cikara, Princeton University
Stephen J. Read, University of Southern California
Todd Heatherton, Dartmouth College
 

Abstracts
Neural Markers of Individuated Person Perception‐  Tiffany  A.  Ito,  University  of  Colorado‐ 
This  talk  will  focus  on  evidence  that  the  N200  ERP  component  is  sensitive  to  individuating  processing  during 
person  perception.    Past  studies  show  N200  differentiation  between  familiar  and  unfamiliar  individuals,  and 
racial  ingroup  and  outgroup  members,  suggesting  it  varies  with  the  depth  of  processing.    To  more  explicitly 
examine this, we recorded ERPs as participants made predictions about an individual’s future behavior based on 
past  behavior.    Relying  more  on  specific  past  behaviors  to  make  future  predictions,  rather  than  a  salient  social 
category distinction, can be viewed as engaging in more individuated processing.   Participants varied in their use 
of  individuating  information,  and  the  N200  was  sensitive  to  this  variation.    In  another  study,  we  sought  to 
manipulate the N200 by manipulating processing goals.   Here, the N200 was increased when participants formed 
judgment about others while taking a first‐person as compared third‐person perspective.  Together, these results 
suggest that the N200 may index processes associated with deeper, more individuated person judgments.   

Us versus them: Mere social identification shapes neural responses to
intergroup competition and harm Mina Cikara, Princeton University; Matthew Botvinick, Princeton 
University; and Susan Fiske, Princeton University‐ Affective reactions to others’ successes and failures are influenced 
by group identification, not just personal gain or loss. The failures of a fellow group member are painful, while 
those  of  a  rival  may  engender  pleasure—Schadenfreude.  Pleasure  at  other’s  misfortunes  may  facilitate  active 
harm against rivals. Here we show that mere social identification affects neural structures previously implicated 
in primary rewards and punishments. In the current fMRI study, 11 Red Sox and 7 Yankees die‐hard fans watched 
baseball plays featuring their favored teams and rivals playing one another and a neutral third team, the Orioles. 
Stimuli were screenshots adapted from an internet sportscast site (ESPN Gamecast) during actual games between 
the relevant teams. Participants reported pleasure, anger, and pain in response to each play’s outcome. Positive 
outcomes  (favored‐success,  rival‐failure,  and  the  Schadenfreude  condition—rival‐failure  against  the  Orioles)  all 
elicited  significantly  more  pleasure  than  the  control  condition  (Orioles  versus  Blue  Jays).  Likewise,  negative 
outcomes (favored‐failure and rival‐success) elicited significantly more anger and pain than the control condition. 
We  threshold  all  fMRI  data  at  p  <  .05,  corrected  for  multiple  comparisons.  As  predicted,  baseball  plays  with 
positive  outcomes  (as  compared  to  control)  engaged  ventral  striatum  (VS).  VS  activation  correlated  with 
subjective ratings of pleasure but not anger or pain. Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), supplementary motor area 
(SMA),  and  insula—parts  of  a  well‐established  pain  matrix—were  active  during  baseball  plays  with  negative 
outcomes  (as  compared  to  control).  ACC  activation  correlated  with  subjective  ratings  of  pain,  but  not  anger  or 
pleasure.  We  further  hypothesized  that  if  watching  a  competitive  group’s  misfortune  is  accompanied  by  the 
experience of pleasure (instead of empathy, for example), this pleasure might be related to a desire to harm the 
rival  team  and  people  associated  with  it  (i.e.,  their  fans).  Participants  completed  a  survey  two  weeks  after  the 
scan,  reporting  the  likelihood  that  they  would  aggress  towards  Orioles’  and  rival  team  fans.  Participants  who 
reported  a  greater  likelihood  of  aggressing  against  a  rival  team  fan  (i.e.,  insulting,  threatening,  and  hitting, 
controlling  for  baseline  aggression  against  Orioles’  fans)  also  exhibited  more  VS  activation  in  response  to 
watching  the  favored  team  succeed  and  the  rival  team  fail.  This  study  demonstrates  that  regions  that  respond 
reliably  to  one’s  own  gains  and  losses—VS  and  ACC,  SMA,  and  insula—encode  information  about  others’ 
outcomes,  the  subjective  values  of  which  are  inherently  defined  by  the  perceiver’s  social  identification.  These 
results  suggest  that  evolutionarily  old  brain  systems,  which  may  have  developed  to  respond  to  rewarding  and 
painful stimuli in the service of reinforcing adaptive behaviors, may have evolved to encode stimuli as defined by 
social  identity,  particularly  group‐level  rewards  and  punishments.  Furthermore,  participants  who  reported 
greater rival‐specific aggression also exhibited greater VS activity in response to watching pleasurable baseball 

 

[5] 

plays,  including  the  pure  Schadenfreude  condition.  Social  identification  may  be  one  mechanism  by  which 
aggressive behaviors spread beyond individual rivals to other individuals merely identified with a rival group. We 
discuss the broader implications for intergroup dynamics and conflict. 
 
He's black?! But he’s also a doctor: A Neural Network Implementation of the
Iterative Reprocessing Model of Racial Stereotype Evaluations-  Stephen  J.  Read, 
University  of  Southern  California;  and  Philip  Ehret,  University  of  Southern  California‐  In  2007,  Cunningham,  Zelazo, 
Packer,  and  Van  Bavel  published  the  iterative  reprocessing  (IR)  model  for  understanding  the  processing 
dynamics  of  attitudes  and  evaluations.   They  suggested  a  new  conception  of  how  evaluations  can  evolve  over 
stages  of  processing.   Moving  away  from  dual‐attitude  and  dual  system  models,  the  IR  model  proposes  that 
evaluations  do  not  progress  in  two  distinct  pathways;  one  automatic  and  one  controlled,  but  instead  evolve  as 
information  about  valenced  stimuli  is  reprocessed.   A  stimulus  will  be  initially  processed  by  lower‐order 
evaluative  processes  and  later,  on  subsequent  iterations,  higher‐order  semantic  and  associated  evaluative 
processes will be recruited to recalculate and modify the initial evaluation.  Using Emergent 5.0.2 neural network 
modeling  software  (Aisa,  Mingus,  &  O'Reilly,  2008),  we  have  constructed  a  neural  network  that  successfully 
represents several of the key concepts of the IR model. Our model is an eight‐layer localist network incorporating 
separate layers for stimulus inputs, basic race and sex recognition, higher‐order semantic layers, and a positive 
and  negative  evaluation  layer.   This  network  is  presented  with  visual  observations  about  sixteen  ‘individuals’ 
consisting  of  information  about  features  such  as  skin  tone,  hair  length,  clothing,  and  features  of  their  physical 
environment,  processed  by  the  thalamus  layer.   From  these  observations,  the  network  quickly  identifies  race, 
either  black  or  white,  and  the  sex  of  the  individual,  and  initially  evaluates  the  individual  based  on  these  two 
characteristics.  This initial evaluation of race and sex is part of the first iterations of the stimuli and likely occurs 
without consciousness in limbic structures such as the amygdala.  As activation continues to spread, the stimuli 
are reprocessed in later iterations in higher‐order semantic layers representing the orbitofrontal cortex, anterior 
cingulate cortex, and lateral prefrontal cortex that recognize higher level concepts such as physical location (e.g., 
office  or  street)  and  profession.   Once  the  individual’s  profession  is  determined,  this  activates  stereotypic 
attributes, such as intelligent for a doctor, or violent for a gang member.  These attributes then activate associated 
positive or negative evaluations or attitudes, revising evaluations in the positive and negative evaluation layers 
representing the amygdala. This network is trained in two steps.  First it undergoes initial training to establish a 
simple stereotype based on perceptual cues, with highly negative evaluations of black males, slightly less negative 
evaluations of black females, and highly positive evaluations of white males and females.  Learning is then nearly 
reduced to zero for basic race and sex evaluations to maintain the stereotype and a later training environment is 
presented to the network to allow it to learn appropriate higher‐level semantic representations of the stimuli and 
the  appropriate  attitudes  and  corresponding  evaluations.   The  network  can  then  be  tested  with  specific 
individuals,  such  as  a  black  male  doctor.   By  monitoring  the  evolution  of  both  the  positive  and  negative 
evaluation,  we  can  see  clear  effects  of  later  iterations  and  revisions  of  evaluations.   For  example,  a  black  male 
doctor will initially receive a highly negative evaluation that is completely revised to a highly positive evaluation 
with later iterations that activate attitudes associated with doctors.  

 
The Neural Basis of Self-Regulation Failure- Todd Heatherton, Dartmouth College‐ Many 
societal problems, from obesity to addiction to driving while intoxicated, stem from an inability to control the self. 
This talk will describe research that uses functional magnetic resonance imaging to identify the neural 
mechanisms underlying self‐regulation failures. Studies focus on a cue reactivity model of diet failure. 
 
 
 
 

 

[6] 

Session D: Emotion
Saturday, October 30
1:30 PM – 2:45 PM
Thalia Wheatley, Dartmouth College
Lotte van Dillen, Leiden University
Stephanie D. Preston, University of Michigan
Adam Anderson, University of Toronto

Abstracts
Cross-modal, dynamic social intelligence-  Thalia  Wheatley,  Dartmouth  College‐  Research  on 
social intelligence overwhelmingly relies on static stimuli, such as photographs of facial expressions.  While these 
endeavors have been fruitful, the world is not a static place.  Rather, social communication is dynamic, varying, 
and  continuous  and  the  human  brain  evolved  to  handle  the  associated  computations.      However,  very  little  is 
understood about how social meaning is communicated dynamically (e.g., through motion and sound) and even 
less about how the brain accomplishes the remarkable feat of extracting social meaning from rapidly modulating 
sensory streams. One efficiency the brain might use to extract social meaning is to recognize similarities across 
different kinds of dynamic inputs.  For example, angry sound and angry motion may have important similarities 
(irregular, fast, downward).  This is intuitively appealing:  sad music and sad motion are often described as slow 
and heavy; happy music and motion as bouncy and light, etc.  To investigate this “common structure” hypothesis, 
we  developed  a  computer  program  with  the  ability  to  sonify  (music)  and  visualize  (animation)  five  dynamic 
features  (e.g.,  speed).    Via  this  program,  25  subjects  each  created  six  musical  clips  that  they  felt  best  conveyed 
each  of  six  emotions:  angry,  sad,  happy,  peaceful,  scared.    We  asked  a  second  set  of  subjects  to  create  six 
animation  clips  that  conveyed  the  same  emotions.    We  found  that  subjects  specified  different  dynamic 
configurations  for  different  emotions.  That  is,  the  emotion  being  conveyed  accounted  for  the  majority  of  the 
variance  in  the  dynamic  features.    These  emotion‐specific  configurations  were  consistent  across  audiovisual 
modality.  Modality (music vs. animation) accounted for almost none of the variance.  We presented the stimuli 
generated from this study to a new set of subjects as they were scanned in a 3T scanner.    As predicted by a large 
literature,  we  found  that  the  musical  clips  activated  primary  and  secondary  auditory  cortices  relative  to  the 
animations and that animations activated motion‐sensitive cortex relative to music.   Most importantly, we found 
that the superior temporal sulcus (STS), a region that lies between these modality‐specific areas, was equivalently 
and  strongly  activated  by  both  music  and  movement.    This  suggests  that  the  STS  plays  a  key  role  in  extracting 
social meaning from multiple dynamic streams, affording a representational efficiency in the service of real‐time 
social understanding.  Put succinctly, the encoding, recognition, and production of happy, sad, or angry sounds is 
linked  to  the  encoding,  recognition,  and  production,  of  happy,  sad,  or  angry  movements,  respectively.  Here  we 
summarize the literature that suggests such a cross‐modal efficiency in the brain, present preliminary research 
that this efficiency subserves social perception. Emotion was the strongest predictor of slider bar placement (a 
measure of effect size, partial eta2= .81). Importantly, and consistent with a deep structure hypothesis, modality 
had  little  effect  on  where  participants  put  the  slider  bars  to  create  each  emotion  (partial  eta2=  .09,  ns).  For 
example,  angry  was  deemed  “fast,  irregular,  and  downward”  for  both  sound  and  motion  and  this  configuration 
was distinct from that which defined any of the other emotions 
In the eye of the beholder: Categorization strategies modulate vigilance
for threatening faces- Lotte van Dillen, Leiden University, New York University; Lasana Harris, New York 
University,  Duke  University;  Belle  Derks,  Leiden  University;  Daniel  Lakens,  Technische  Universiteit;  Kees  van  den  Bos, 
Utrecht  University;  Wilco  van  Dijk,  Leiden  University‐  Various  attentional  paradigms  have  demonstrated  the 
enhanced ability of threatening faces to attract attention or to hold attention, once captured. For example, people 
are more easily distracted by disgusted faces than by neutral faces and people take longer to count the features of 
angry faces than of happy faces. To account for such findings, theorists have proposed that natural evolution has 
equipped  people  to  efficiently  screen  the  environment  for  potential  threats.  One  important  question  is  how 
flexibly  such  a  vigilance  mechanism  operates.  On  a  typical  day,  people  are  constantly  confronted  with  negative 
cues.  Yet,  people  are  well  able  to  perform  goal‐directed  behavior  under  even  the  most  emotionally  distracting 
circumstances. We therefore propose that vigilance for threatening faces may be subject to contextual variations 
in  accord  with  people’s  current  goals.  More  specifically,  we  suggest  that  vigilance  for  threatening  faces  is 
moderated  by  the  way  in  which  people  categorize  these  faces.  If  facial  expressions  are  part  of  the  mental 
representation of a category, the attention system will be more susceptible to these features. Accordingly, people 

 

[7] 

should  display  vigilance  for  threatening  faces  especially  when  the  activated  category  representation  prompts 
attentional  processing  of  facial  expressions.  Facial  expressions  play  a  pivotal  role  in  social  categorization 
processes,  as  they  communicate  information  about  the  person’s  intentions.  Through  social  learning  and/or 
stereotyping,  people  may  come  to  associate  emotional  expressions  with  certain  social  categories.  Since  facial 
expressions contain relevant information to perform social categorizations (i.e., gender, personality) but not for 
nonsocial  categorizations  (i.e.,  eye‐color),  we  therefore  hypothesized  that  threatening  facial  expressions  should 
bias attention especially during social categorization tasks. To test this notion, in a series of five experiments, we 
compared people’s reaction times and neurophysiological responses to threatening (angry, disgusted) and non‐
threatening (neutral, happy) faces during a task that required people to categorize faces on social dimensions (i.e. 
gender  or  personality),  versus  a  task  that  required  people  to  categorize  faces  on  strictly  physical  features  (i.e. 
stimulus color). Consistent with our hypothesis, we showed that participants were slower to name the gender of 
threatening compared to non‐threatening faces, but not their color (blue or green) or eye‐color (blue or brown). 
Furthermore,  when  we  informed  participants  that  different  eye‐colors  (blue  or  brown)  indicated  a  personality 
trait  (introversion,  extraversion)  versus  a  physical  trait  (sensitivity  to  high  versus  low  light  frequency), 
threatening  faces  interfered  with  task  performance  when  participants  used  eye‐color  to  categorize  the 
personality  trait  but  not  when  participants  used  eye‐color  to  categorize  the  physical  trait.    Finally,  we  found 
electrophysiological  brain  activity  as  well  as  facial  muscle  activity  in  response  to  threatening  faces  to  predict 
reaction  times  to  these  faces,  but  again,  only  when  participants  had  to  implement  a  social  category  (gender, 
personality).  Thus,  converging  evidence  from  both  behavioral  and  neurophysiological  measures  suggests  that 
vigilance for threatening faces is contingent on people’s categorization strategies, supporting the perspective that 
social influences modulate even basic emotional processes. 
The drive to consume is social and emotional but decisions to consume need
not be: Convergent lessons from neuroimaging and behavior- Stephanie D. Preston, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor‐ Background: Americans spend their weekends at the mall or organizing their 
ever accumulating piles of paper, clothes, and gadgets, which in extreme cases can have serious consequences not 
only  for  the  environment  but  also  for  but  the  individual’s  quality  of  life,  social  relationships,  health  and  even 
mortality.  Despite  a  mainstream  interest,  little  research  has  investigated  the  neural  bases  of  acquiring  and 
discarding  everyday  goods.  Prior  experiments  on  animal  food  storing,  and  human  hoarding,  shopping,  and 
gambling points to the mesolimbocortical system, particularly the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) and orbital frontal 
cortex (OFC). We tested the hypothesis that this system also underlies decisions to acquire and discard mundane 
goods,  but  particularly  for  personally‐desired  items.    Twenty  participants  (11  males)  completed  a  block‐design 
fMRI  study  using  a  forced‐choice  procedure  under  four  nested  frames  to  acquire  or  discard  items,  while 
maximizing  personal  preference  or  monetary  profit.  We  contrasted  all  four  conditions  against  a  control  size 
discrimination  task  and  directly  contrasted  acquisition  versus  discarding  and  personal  to  monetary  decisions 
(using  response  time  as  a  nuisance  covariate).  BOLD  signal  responses  were  also  correlated  in  the  regions  of 
interest  with  trait  measures  of  hoarding.  The  orbital  frontal  cortex  (OFC)  was  involved  across  frames,  but  all 
other  regions  were  significantly  affected  by  the  frame,  which  also  changed  qualitative  object  preferences. 
Monetary  decisions  recruited  executive  regions,  and  biased  choice  towards  valuable  (but  less  desired)  items. 
Personal decisions recruited midline, affective regions and caused subjects to emphasize inexpensive, immediate 
rewards  (candy,  coins).  Acquisition  augmented  OFC  activity  and  biased  subjects  towards  shiny,  metal  objects 
while  discarding  recruited  the  anterior  cingulate  and  insula,  and  biased  subjects  towards  utilitarian,  ‘should’ 
items.  In  contrast  to  neuroeconomic  studies,  acquiring  such  goods  did  not  uniformly  engage  the  NAcc,  which 
instead  was  only  activated  during  personal  acquisition  to  the  extent  that  the  subject  reported  trait  hoarding 
problems. Decisions about everyday goods may necessarily involve the OFC, but otherwise represent a complex 
interplay  between  the  frame,  the  item,  and  the  decider.  For  individuals  in  an  acquisitive  state  of  mind,  even 
mundane goods may acquire the incentive salience of more hedonic items. Additional convergent work in our lab 
using emotional induction and social rejection manipulations confirms that emotions associated with uncertainty 
and  a  lack  of  security  can  directly  increase  acquisitiveness,  by  augmenting  both  the  typical  desire  for  hedonic 
goods as well as the usually lower desire for more mundane, future‐oriented items. Research on material goods is 
critical because it addresses a ubiquitous behavior that affects our economy, quality of life, and the environment, 
Moreover, such decisions should become the purview of social psychologists because the decisions increasingly 
appear  to  reflect  how  secure  and  stable  the  individual  feels  in  relation  to  their  social  and  familial  network.  By 
directly addressing the human urge to consume, we are better positioned to understand and abate the problems 
associated with natural resources that are necessarily decreasing in a context of seemingly exponential need. 
Form and function in the emotions- Adam  Anderson,  University  of  Toronto‐  According  to  his 
modern  interpreters,  one  of  Darwin’s  most  significant  contributions  to  psychology  and  neuroscience  is  that 
emotions and their expression are independent natural kinds. Overlooked, however, was Darwin’s original thesis 
that emotional expressions are not distinct but rather reflect structural oppositions derived from some original 
functional adaptation.  I will present evidence that 1) emotional expression appearance and perception reflects 

 

[8] 

oppositions  in  global  form  2)  the  origin  of  these  oppositions  lies  in  a  primitive  sensory  regulatory  function  for 
interactions with the physical environment and 3) that these sensory regulatory functions have been behaviorally 
and neurally co‐opted for the purposes of social regulation.    
 
 

Session E: Poster Presentations Session 1
Saturday, October 30
2:45 PM – 4:15 PM
Abstracts pp. 18 – 35

Session F: Perspective
Saturday, October 30
4:15 PM – 5:30 PM
Naomi I. Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles
Alexa M. Tullett, University of Toronto
Robert G. Franklin, Jr., The Pennsylvania State University
Rebecca R. Saxe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstracts
Why rejection hurts: Exploring the functional consequences of a physicalsocial pain overlap- Naomi  I.  Eisenberger,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles‐  Numerous  languages 
characterize ‘social pain,’ the feelings resulting from social loss or rejection, with words typically reserved for 
describing  physical  pain  (“broken  hearts,”  “hurt  feelings”)  and  perhaps  for  good  reason.  It  has  been  suggested 
that,  in  mammalian  species,  the  social  attachment  system  borrowed  the  computations  of  the  physical  pain 
system to prevent the potentially harmful consequences of social separation. Indeed, several studies have now 
shown  that  physical  pain,  such  as  the  dorsal  anterior  cingulate  cortex  (dACC)  and  the  anterior  insula 
(Eisenberger et al, 2003; Burklund et al., 2007; Eisenberger et al., 2007). Here, we further tested this physical‐ 
social pain overlap by examining two functional consequences of such shared neural circuitry: 1) Are individuals 
who are more sensitive to one kind of pain also more sensitive to the other? and 2) Do factors that alter one type 
of pain have a similar effect on the other?   To examine the first question, Study 1 explored whether a mu‐opioid 
receptor  gene  polymorphism  (A118G),  associated  with  physical  pain  sensitivity,  also  related  to  social  pain 
sensitivity (Way et al., 2009). Participants (n=125) completed a self‐report inventory of dispositional rejection 
sensitivity  and  a  subsample  (n=31)  completed  an  fMRI  session  in  which  they  were  socially  rejected.  G‐allele 
carriers—previously  shown  to  be  more  sensitive  to  physical  pain—evidenced  greater  self‐reported  rejection 
sensitivity than A‐allele homozygotes. Consistent with these results, G allele carriers also showed greater dACC 
and anterior insula activity in response to social rejection.  Next, we examined whether factors that alter social 
pain have similar effects on physical pain. Previously, we demonstrated that social support reduces social pain, 
as  evidenced  by  reduce  dACC  and  anterior  insula  activity  to  social  rejection  (Masten  et  al.,  2010).  Study  2 
explored  whether  social  support  could  also  reduce  physical  pain  (Master  et  al.,  2009).  Participants  (n=25)  in 
long‐term  relationships  received  painful  stimuli  to  their  forearms  as  they  either  held  their  partner’s  hand,  a 
stranger’s  hand,  or  an  object  or  as  they  viewed  pictures  of  their  partner,  a  stranger,  or  an  object.  Results 
demonstrated that holding the partner’s hand (vs. a stranger’s hand or object) as well as simply viewing pictures 
of  the  partner  (vs.  a  stranger  or  object)  reduced  pain  ratings.      Finally,  to  examine  whether  factors  that  alter 
physical pain have similar effects on social pain, Study 3 explored whether Tylenol, a physical painkiller, could 
also reduce social pain (DeWall et al., in press). In two experiments, participants were randomly assigned to take 
either  Tylenol  or  placebo  daily  for  three  weeks.  In  the  first  experiment  (n=62),  Tylenol  consumption  reduced 
daily reports of social pain over the three‐week period, whereas placebo consumption led to no changes in these 

 

[9] 

self‐reports. In the second experiment (n=25), Tylenol (vs. placebo) reduced dACC and anterior insula activation 
in response to a scanner‐based episode of social rejection. Taken together, these results lend additional support 
to  the  hypothesis  that  physical  and  social  pain  processes  overlap  and  support  the  commonsense  notion  that 
rejection “hurts.”  
Ambivalent Reactions to Physical Suffering‐  Alexa  M.  Tullett,  University  of  Toronto;  and 
Michael Inzlicht, University of Toronto‐ When portraying the plights of people around the world who experience 
physical suffering, the media inevitably has a decision to make: show images that vividly depict that suffering in 
an effort to convey the harshness of reality, or show less disturbing images as a way to humanize victims and 
avoid  sensationalizing  suffering.  With  this  dilemma  in  mind,  we  conducted  a  study  with  the  aim  of  better 
understanding the consequences of such choices, as well as teasing apart the complexities of people’s responses 
to  human  suffering.  Participants  viewed  two  sets  of  10  images  of  African  children  that  were  ostensibly 
associated with two different charities. The images differed to the extent that they depicted physical suffering 
(e.g. visible lesions, emaciation), but participants were told that the people in each set experienced similar living 
conditions  and  daily  struggles.  Throughout  the  experiment,  brain  activity  was  recorded  using 
electroencephalography  (EEG)  technology  in  order  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  participants  were  in  an 
approach  motivational  state  as  they  viewed  the  images.  This  was  accomplished  by  measuring  activity  over 
frontal  brain  regions  and  then  computing  an  index  of  left‐frontal  activation  (F4‐F3),  a  pattern  associated  with 
approach  motivation.  In  addition,  participants  responded  to  a  number  of  questions  regarding  their  emotional 
reactions  to  the  images,  as  well  as  their  willingness  to  help  the  children  involved.  Finally,  participants  were 
given  $5  (as  5  $1  coins)  for  their  participation,  but  had  the  opportunity  to  donate  any  amount  of  it,  in  any 
proportion,  to  the  two  charities  they  previously  viewed.  This  donation  served  as  a  behavioral  dependent 
measure similar to the type of action one might be expected to engage in to help suffering people encountered 
outside  the  experimental  context.  We  found  that  suffering  images  elicited  stronger  feelings  of  empathy  and 
sadness, as well as greater intentions to help and larger actual donations relative to the non‐suffering images. 
Interestingly,  however,  suffering  images  also  caused  participants  to  display  greater  avoidance  related  brain 
activity  and  to  feel  more  disgust,  both  towards  the  appearance  of  the  people  in  the  images  and  towards  the 
social  situation  that  caused  the  suffering  to  occur.    For  the  suffering  images,  these  feelings  of  disgust  towards 
societal factors predicted feelings of anger and sadness, as well as intentions to help. Overall, then, our findings 
suggest  that  while  images  of  suffering  elicit  negative  reactions  such  as  avoidance  and  disgust,  these  reactions 
can be overcome, and can even motivate prosocial intentions.  
 

I Feel Your Pain: Interpersonal Familiarity Modulates Neural Responses to
Empathically Experienced Rejection-  Robert  G.  Franklin,  Jr.,  The  Pennsylvania  State  University; 
Joseph E. Beeney, The Pennsylvania State University; Kenneth N. Levy, The Pennsylvania State University; and Reginald 
B.  Adams,  Jr.,  The  Pennsylvania  State  University‐Observing  others  in  pain  elicits  activation  in  many  of  the  same 
neural  regions  involved  with  feeling  physical  pain,  especially  the  anterior  insula  (AI)  and  the  dorsal  anterior 
cingulate (dACC). This suggests empathy involves some similar processes as feeling pain, as the AI and dACC are 
involved  in  processing  distress  and  vicarious  feelings  involved  with  pain  (Singer  et  al.,  2004;  2009).  Social 
rejection  evokes  activation  in  the  AI  and  dACC  similar  to  physical  pain  (Eisenberger  et  al.,  2003).  However, 
empathy for social pain has not been found to evoke responses similar for those who experienced physical pain 
(Masten  &  Eisenberger,  2010).  One  possible  reason  for  this  is  that  this  study  examined  empathy  to  strangers. 
Relationship quality is rarely a variable of interest in empathy. This is surprising as the Perception‐Action Model 
of empathy suggests stronger relationships should lead to deeper representations of others’ mental states, and 
thus  greater  empathy  (Preston  &  de  Waal,  2002).  These  representations  are  thought  to  involve  the  putative 
human mirror neuron system (MNS), especially including the posterior inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; Iacoboni et al. 
1999).  In  this  examination  we  recruited  twenty  participants  who  brought  same‐sex  friends  with  them. 
Participants  completed  two  runs  of  2:45,  where  they  watched  their  friends  complete  the  Cyberball  ball‐toss 
game with two other participants (Williams et al. 2000). The participants’ friends were included equally in the 
first round of the task and excluded in the second round. Following scanning, participants completed an adapted 
version of the Friendship Quality Questionnaire (Parker & Asher, 1993). Data were preprocessed, normalized to 
the MNI template, and analyzed using SPM5 and thresholded at p < .005, 41 voxels, equivalent to p < .05 based 
on Monte Carlo simulations. Watching a friend be socially excluded minus included led to activation in the dACC 
(12, 20, 40) and right AI (44, ‐10,‐10). When friendship quality was used as a subject‐level regressor, activation 
was present in the bilateral dACC (28, 62, 10; ‐14, 14, 42), left AI (‐44, ‐6, 12) and bilateral IFG (66, ‐4, 24; ‐44, ‐
10,  60).  Likewise,  friendship  quality  correlated  with  dACC  activity  using  activation  pulled  from  the  dACC 
coordinates  found  by  Eisenberger  et  al.  (2003).  Further,  we  examined  whether  IFG  activity  mediated  the 
relationship between friendship quality and dACC activity. Using beta values pulled from the significantly active 
cluster  in  the  dACC  and  the  anatomically  defined  IFG  (BA  45  from  the  Talaraich  Daemon;  Aziz‐Zadeh  et  al., 

 

[10] 

2006),  IFG  activation  fully  mediated  the  relationship  between  friendship  quality  and  dACC  activation.  These 
findings indicate empathy for social pain may have similar underlying neural correlates as social pain. Likewise, 
relationship quality was significantly correlated with neural responses for empathy, showing that we empathize 
with  those  we  most  closely  associate  with.  This  suggests  relationships  may  lead  to  deeper  representations  of 
others,  as  suggested  by  the  PAM,  and  thus  lead  to  greater  empathy.  Supporting  this,  the  premotor  MNS  may 
serve  as  a  neural  basis  for  these  deeper  representations,  as  premotor  MNS  activity  mediated  the  relationship 
between friendship quality and dACC activity. 
How brains think about minds- Rebecca  R.  Saxe,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology-When  we 
look at other people, the features visible on the outside are only a small part of what we see. We are much more 
interested in seeing, or inferring, what's going on inside: other people's thoughts, beliefs and desires. If a person 
checks her watch, is she uncertain about the time, late for an appointment, or bored with the conversation? If a 
person shoots his friend on a hunting trip, did he intend revenge or just mistake his friend for a partridge? One 
of the most amazing discoveries of recent human cognitive neuroscience is that humans use a specific group of 
brain  regions  for  thinking  about  thoughts.  What  do  these  regions  do?  How  do  they  develop?  I  will  present 
evidence  from  fMRI,  developmental  fMRI,  and  TMS  studies  of  the  neural  mechanisms  for  Theory  of  Mind  and 
moral judgment. 
 
 
 

Session G: Keynote Address
Saturday, October 30
6:00 PM – 7:30 PM
Gary Bernston, The Ohio State University

Session H: The brain outside the scanner: Linking social neuroscience data with realworld outcomes
Sunday, October 31, 2010
9:00 AM- 10:15 AM
Elliot T. Berkman, University of Oregon
Hedy Kober, Yale University
Pranjal H. Mehta, Columbia University
Emily B. Falk, University of Michigan

Abstracts
Neural predictors of successful goal pursuit during smoking cessation:
Linking neural and real-world methods- Elliot T. Berkman, University of Oregon; Emily B. Falk 
University  of  Michigan;  and  Matthew  D.  Lieberman,  University  of  California.  Los  Angeles‐  The  ability  to  inhibit 
unwanted habitual responses is critical to successful goal pursuit in humans.  Neurocognitive investigations have 
identified  the  core  brain  systems  involved  in  this  process  and,  in  parallel,  ecological  behavioral  investigations 
have  documented  its  real‐world  correlates  and  implications.   However,  there  are  no  data  linking  the 
neurocognitive  and  ecological/behavioral  domains  because  of  the  practical  limitations  of  most  neuroimaging 
environments.  The present study employs a joint neuroimaging and experience sampling paradigm to begin to 
address that gap by integrating a neural measure of response inhibition, brain responses to a go/no‐go task, with 
an everyday form of response inhibition: regulation of craving during cigarette smoking cessation.  A sample of 
twenty‐seven cigarette smokers completed a go/no‐go task during functional magnetic resonance imaging before 
cessation, then their progress was tracked eight times daily for the first twenty‐one days following their quit date 

 

[11] 

using  experience  sampling.   Results  demonstrated  that  increased  activation  in  the  right  inferior  frontal  gyrus, 
presupplementary motor area, and basal ganglia during the response inhibition task at baseline were associated 
with an attenuated association between cravings and subsequent smoking within days.  Furthermore, the extent 
of activation in the basal ganglia during response inhibition also predicted overall change in smoking across four 
weeks;  this  result  was  further  verified  with  a  cross‐validation  analysis.   Together,  these  findings  support  the 
ecological validity of neurocognitive tasks to everyday response inhibition, and provide a novel methodological 
tool for integrating between laboratory imaging methods and real‐world behavior.    
Understanding treatment for addiction: The Regulation of Craving task- 
Hedy Kober, Yale University, Columbia University; Peter Mende‐Siedlecki, Princeton University; Ethan Kross, University 
of  Michigan;  Walter  Mischel,  Columbia  University;  Carl  Hart,  Columbia  University;  and  Kevin  Ochsner,  Columbia 
University‐ According to the DSM‐IV, drug craving is a key feature of substance dependence, which is coupled with 
an impaired ability to control craving despite adverse consequences. In recent years, most empirically validated 
cognitive/behavioral  treatments  for  substance  use  disorders  have  come  to  focus  on  teaching  strategies  to 
regulate craving, and it is believed that the ability to regulate craving is one of the central mechanisms–of‐action 
of such treatments. Consistently, clinical data have shown that while craving predicts relapse, the acquisition of 
cognitive  strategies  predicts  treatment  success  and  the  application  of  such  strategies  both  during  and  after 
treatment  reduces  relapse  significantly.  Despite  this,  experimental  models  for  studying  this  ability  are  lacking, 
and  the  neural  mechanisms  underlying  the  regulation  of  craving  were  poorly  understood.  To  address  these 
questions directly, we developed the “ROC task” to study the Regulation Of Craving in laboratory settings. During 
the task, participants view images of drug‐related (cigarettes) and non drug related (food) stimuli, and are asked 
to  use  a  cognitive  strategy  to  reduce  their  craving.  The  strategies  were  drawn  from  Cognitive‐Behavioral 
treatment protocols. In study 1, cigarette‐smoking participants reported significantly reduced craving when using 
a cognitive strategy (Kober et al, 2010). In study 2, we found that the regulation of craving was associated with 
activity  in  dorsomedial,  dorsolateral,  and  ventrolateral  prefrontal  cortex  (PFC).  This  was  accompanied  by 
decreased activity in regions previously associated with emotion in general and craving in particular, including 
the  ventral  striatum  (VS),  subgenual  cingulate,  amygdala,  and  ventral  tegmental  area.  Further,  decreases  in 
craving correlated with decreases in VS activity and increases in dlPFC activity. A subsequent mediation analysis 
showed that VS activity fully mediated the relationship between dlPFC and reported craving (Kober, in revisions). 
In study 3, self‐reported craving during the task predicted reduction in smoking at a two‐week follow up. Taken 
together,  these  data  suggest  that  both  laboratory  and  fMRI  studies  can  be  used  to  elucidate  the  mechanisms  of 
action  of  real‐world  treatment  outcomes,  such  as  smoking  cessation.  In  so  doing,  the  ROC  task  provides  a 
methodological tool for studying the ability to regulate craving across treatment modalities and substance‐using 
populations and for developing more effective treatments for substance use disorders. 
The Biology of Bargaining: Dynamic Hormone Changes during Negotiation
Predict Economic Profit- Pranjal H. Mehta, Columbia University; Andy Yap, Columbia University; and Shira 
Mor,  Columbia  University‐  Steroid  hormones  levels  can  fluctuate  in  social  interactions,  but  the  economic 
implications of these biological changes remain unclear. Here we show that rapid changes in hormones associated 
with  dominance  (testosterone)  and  psychological  stress  (cortisol)  jointly  explain  economic  profit  in  bargaining 
interactions. In a bilateral bargaining game (Study 1) and a distributive negotiation in MBA students (Study 2), 
testosterone rises during bargaining predicted greater economic profit only if cortisol simultaneously dropped. If 
cortisol  rose  during  bargaining,  testosterone  rises  were  associated  with  poor  economic  outcomes.  The  findings 
suggest  that  in  the  absence  of  psychological  stress  (cortisol  decrease),  rising  testosterone  encourages  rational 
decision‐making and the successful pursuit of monetary reward during the bargaining process. If psychological 
stress is high however (cortisol increase), rising testosterone during bargaining may lead to irrational decision‐
making and economic losses. There is, it seems, a “dark side” and “bright side” to rising testosterone in economic 
social interactions that depends on activity in the neuroendocrine stress axis. Pilot fMRI data will be presented to 
elucidate neural mechanisms of the effects, and implications for real‐world bargaining behavior will be discussed. 
   
Neural Focus Groups: Predicting individual and population behavior change
from the brain- Emily B. Falk, University of Michigan; Elliot T. Berkman, University of Oregon; and Matthew D. 
Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles‐  Can looking to the brain help us predict how individuals or even 
whole populations will respond to persuasive messages?  We recently found that neural responses in an a priori 
region  of  interest  (ROI)  in  medial  prefrontal  cortex  (MPFC,  BA10)  during  persuasive  messages  could  predict 
behavior change above and beyond self‐reported intentions to change behavior (Falk et al., JNeuro).  In that study, 
we  used  a  health  behavior  of  relatively  low  motivational  relevance  (sunscreen  use)  and  predicted  individual 
behavior  change  over  one  week.  In  a  follow‐up  study,  we  now  examine  a  health  behavior  of  high  motivational 
relevance  (smokers  trying  to  quit)  over  a  longer  period  of  time  (one  month).   Critically,  we  were  also  able  to 

 

[12] 

compare  the  objective  effectiveness  of  advertisements  at  the  population  level  by  working  with  the  American 
Legacy  Foundation  and  Louisiana  Public  Health  Institute.    These  organizations  rolled  out  three  different  ad 
campaigns  (here  referenced  as  A,  B  and  C)  in  comparable  media  markets  that  each  had  a  common  dependent 
measure  –  calls  to  the  national  quitline  1‐800‐QUIT‐NOW  (each  ad  ended  by  showing  this  phone  number). 
Twenty‐eight  smokers  who  were  planning  to  quit  in  the  near  future  were  scanned  while  watching  smoking 
cessation ads from these campaigns.  Objective changes in smoking from pre‐scan to a month after their chosen 
‘quit date’ were assessed using expired carbon monoxide (a biological indicator of smoking behavior).  The neural 
responses in an anatomically defined MPFC ROI more than doubled the total variance accounted for in smoking 
change compared to a model that included standard self‐reports of intentions, self‐efficacy, and ability to relate to 
the  messages  (R‐square  from  self‐reports  =  .15,  R‐square  from  self‐reports  &  MPFC  ROI  =  .35).  Experts  in  the 
industry also indicated that of our three ad groups (A, B, C), Groups A and B were the best and Group C was the 
worst.  Similarly, our 28 scanned subjects also ranked the likely efficacy of the ads A > B > C.  However, Group C 
actually  led  to  the  greatest  proportional  increase  in  quitline  phone  calls  compared  to  a  no‐advertisement 
baseline.  Our MPFC ROI predicted the actual pattern of quitline calls (C > A > B).  These results suggest that our 
sample was more effective as a ‘neural focus group’ than as a traditional self‐report‐based focus group.  Overall, 
our  results  suggest  that  the  brain  contains  hidden  wisdom  about  the  impact  of  persuasive  messages  at  the 
individual  and  population  level  that  is  not  otherwise  accounted  for  in  our  models  of  persuasion  and  behavior 
change. 
 

Session I: Decision Making
Sunday, October 31
10:45 AM- 12:00 PM
Hideki Ohira, Nagoya University
Tobias Brosch, New York University
Kyung Hwa Lee, University of Pittsburgh
Jennifer Beer, University of Texas

Abstracts
Functional Association of Brain and Body in Emotional Decision MakingHideki Ohira ,Nagoya University‐ Though traditional microeconomics has supposed that human decisions are based 
on  logical  and  exact  computation  of  cost‐benefit  balances  or  efficacies,  studies  in  behavioral  economics  have 
shown  that  humans  sometimes  make  seemingly  irrational  decisions  driven  by  emotions.  In  our  everyday 
situations, factors related to decisions are complex and which alternative will be the most beneficial is uncertain. 
In such cases, emotions can be adaptive because they can quickly reduce negative alternatives and facilitate fast 
and  effective  decision  making.  Some  theorists  argued  that  one  important  source  of  such  emotional  drives 
affecting decision making is bodily responses which are represented in brain regions such as the insula (Damasio, 
1994;  Craig,  2009).  In  this  talk,  empirical  evidence  for  the  functional  associations  of  the  brain  and  body 
accompanying  decision  making  will  be  shown  as  follows.  (1)  Heart  rate  responses  can  predict  acceptance  or 
rejection  to  an  unfair  offer  in  an  economical  negotiation  game,  the  Ultimatum  Game.  Activation  of  the  insula 
mediates this phenomenon. (2) Bodily responses reflected by cardiovascular parameters such as heart rate and 
blood  pressure  are  modulated  in  a  top‐down  way  by  the  prefrontal  cortex  on  the  basis  of  evaluation  of 
uncertainty  in  decision  making  situations.  Suggestions  of  these  findings  in  a  perspective  of  evolution  and 
adaptation to environments will be discussed
Generating value(s): Psychological value hierarchies reflect contextdependent sensitivity of the reward system‐  Tobias  Brosch,  New  York  University;  Geraldine 
Coppin, University of Geneva; Klaus R. Scherer, University of Geneva; Sophie Schwartz, University of Geneva; and David 
Sander, University of Geneva‐ Values are motivational constructs that determine what is important to us and which 
goals  we  choose  to  pursue.  Each  individual  possesses  a  hierarchy  of  numerous  values  with  varying  degrees  of 
importance. Cross‐cultural research suggests that the structure of the human value system is universal and can be 
parsimoniously  described  using  a  value  space  spanned  by  two  broad  orthogonal  value  dimensions,  with  one 

 

[13] 

dimension delineating the range between “the pursuit of self‐interest and survival” and “the pursuit of altruistic 
goals” [self‐interest dimension], and a second one covering the range from “openness to change” to “conservation 
of traditions” [openness to change dimension]. We investigated which mechanisms might underlie the fact that 
for some people self‐interest is an important value, but for others not, or the fact that some people are open to 
changing their habitual, well‐established behaviors, whereas others are not. From a biological perspective, human 
and  animal  behavior  is  strongly  driven  by  the  search  for  rewards.  In  an  attempt  to  bridge  psychological  value 
research and neurobiological research on reward processing, we tested the hypothesis that individual differences 
in  basic  neural  reward  mechanisms  during  value‐specific  situations  reflect  the  individual  psychological  value 
hierarchy.  In  a  donation  task,  participants  had  to  distribute  an  amount  of  money  between  themselves  and  a 
charitable organization of their choice. In each trial, a proposition of how a part of the money could be distributed 
was presented, Afterwards, participants had to accept or reject the proposition. Brain activation was measured 
using  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging,  data  analysis  was  conducted  using  SPM8.  Individuals  with  high 
self‐interest value sacrificed less money for charitable donations. Furthermore, they showed higher activation of 
the  ventral  striatum  when  receiving  money,  indicating  that  for  these  individuals  receiving  money  is  more 
rewarding  than  for  individuals  with  low  self‐interest  value.  In  a  go/no‐go  task,  participants  had  to  inhibit 
prepotent responses to simple stimuli. They were presented with a sequence of alternating X and Y and pressed 
the response key after each stimulus, unless the sequence was interrupted (two X or Y presented consecutively). 
In this case, they tried to inhibit the response. Individuals with high openness to change value showed a greater 
differential  response  of  the  dorsal  striatum  between  errors  and  correct  responses  than  individuals  with  low 
openness  to  change  value,  suggesting  a  higher  sensitivity  to  behavioral  errors  resulting  from  persisting  in 
habitual prepotent responses. Our data suggests that context‐dependent neural reward sensitivity biases reflect 
(and  may  even  determine)  differences  in  individual  value  hierarchies  and  underlie  the  effects  of  values  on 
decisions and behaviors. These findings may promote the integration of theories in cognitive neuroscience and 
psychological value research, allowing researchers to tackle the question of how and why some things are more 
important for some people than for others by combining a neurophysiological and a psychological perspective. 

Neural responses to “good” and “bad” individuals differ when evaluating
one’s own emotional responses but not theirs- Kyung Hwa Lee, University of Pittsburgh; and 
Greg Siegle, University of Pittsburgh‐ Theoretical accounts suggest that there are distinct mechanisms underlying 
evaluation  of  one’s  own  emotions  (How  do  I  feel?)  and  others’  emotions  (How  do  others  feel?).  Potentially, 
though, failure to detect these distinctions empirically reflects a confound of empathy – feeling bad for the other. 
To investigate this confound, we manipulated whether a target person was perceived as a good person (likely to 
provoke  empathy)  or  a  bad  person  (ideally,  less  likely  to  provoke  empathy)  using  scripts  and  video  clips 
describing  their  traits  and  behaviors.  Following  this  manipulation,  during  assessment  with  fMRI,  participants 
rated  their  own  emotions  and  the  emotions  of  the  target  while  they  viewed  the  targets’  face  and  a  sentence 
describing various negative situations befalling the target. Behavioral ratings showed that one’s own emotional 
responses  to  the  bad  person  were  decreased  compared  to  the  good  person,  indicating  reduced  empathic 
concern/sympathy  for  the  bad  person.  In  contrast,  participants  rated  both  bad  and  good  persons’  emotions 
similarly. Whether the target was described as a good or bad person also modulated brain activation. The insula 
and  rostral  anterior  cingulate  cortex  (rACC),  which  are  involved  in  self‐emotional  processing,  were  more 
activated  by  evaluating  one’s  own  emotions  to  the  bad  person  compared  to  the  good  person,  potentially 
representing more effortful processing to attain an emotional response to the bad person. However, brain regions 
such as the temporal parietal junction (TPJ), which is involved in emotional processing of others, did not show 
significant  differences  based  on  evaluation  of  the  bad  and  good  targets’  emotions.  Our  findings  suggest  that  a 
context in which one is primed to empathize modulates emotional ratings and brain activation in evaluation of 
one’s own emotions but not that of allegedly “good” or “bad” persons’ emotions.  
 
A Rose By Another Name: Threat Differentiates the Neural Systems
Underlying Unrealistically Positive Social Cognition, Jennifer  S.  Beer,  University  of 
Texas; and Brent L. Hughes, University of Texas‐ One of the most striking features of social evaluation is that it often
tends to be unrealistically positive, at least when it comes to the self and people we care about. Although it is intuitive to
think of unrealistically positive social evaluation as a defensive response designed to maintain positive beliefs about the
self, researchers have recently questioned whether this is the case. Instead, some researchers take the view that
unrealistically positive social evaluations may not always reflect a defensive response but instead expose the cognitive
shortcuts inherent in social evaluation. Recent neural evidence supports the view that unrealistically positive social
evaluation may reflect different underlying processes depending on whether it is a defensive response or not. The 
unrealistic nature of the positive evaluations can be operationalized as self‐beliefs that are significantly different 
than  objective  indicators  such  as  one’s  task  performance,  one’s  relative  social  standing,  and  peer‐perceptions. 
Across  these  diverse  operationalizations,  unrealistic  positivity  is  most  often  marked  by  a  drop  in  orbitofrontal 
cortex activation. For example, our research finds that orbitofrontal cortex activation is parametrically associated 

 

[14] 

with  unrealistically  positive  confidence  in  task  performance  (Beer,  Lombardo,  &  Bhanji,  2010)  and  associated 
with  individual  differences  in  unrealistically  positive  perceptions  of  social  standing  (Beer  &  Hughes,  2010; 
Hughes  &  Beer,  2010a).  Patients  with  orbitofrontal  cortex  damage  tend  to  have  unrealistically  positive  self‐
evaluations  of  their  social  skill  (Beer  et  al,.  2003;  Beer  et  al.,  2006).  However,  when  self‐esteem  threat  is  the 
elicitor of unrealistically positive evaluations of social standing, a different neural profile is found (Hughes & Beer, 
2010b). Taken together, these studies suggest that the mechanism underlying unrealistic positivity may differ as 
a function of whether it is a response to threat or not.  

 
Session J: Poster Presentation Session 2 
Sunday, October 31
1:30 PM – 3:00 PM

Abstracts pp. 36-54

Session K: At the frontier of cultural neuroscience
Sunday, October 31
3:00 PM- 4:15 PM
Joshua Goh, University of Illinois
Jonathan Freeman, Tufts University
Bobby K. Cheon, Northwestern University
Elizabeth A. Reynolds Losin, University of California, Los Angeles
Shinobu Kitayama, University of Michigan

Abstracts
Cultural differences in default-network activity in a spatial judgment
task- Joshua Goh, University of Illinois, University of Texas; Denise Park, University of Texas‐ Previous studies have 
shown cultural differences in functional activity in the ventral visual, frontal, and parietal regions that have been 
attributed  to  differences  in  visual  attention  and  perception  (Goh  et  al.,  2007,  in  press;  Gutchess  et  al.,  2006; 
Hedden et al., 2008). The neural findings across these studies are consistent with Westerners engaging a more 
analytic  style  of  visual  processing  with  greater  attention  to  visual  features,  and  East  Asians  engaging  more 
holistic processing with greater attention to contextual associations in visual stimuli. In this present study, we 
examined  whether  these  cultural  differences  in  visual  processing  would  also  impact  processing  in  default‐
network  regions,  known  to  be  sensitive  to  the  attentional  demands  involved  in  a  task.  This  would  suggest  a 
higher‐level  and  more  widespread  effect  of  cultural  differences  in  visual  processing  on  brain  function  than 
previously thought. 50 Westerners (25 males) and 47 East Asians (25 males) participated in this blocked‐design 
fMRI  experiment  involving  a  relative  spatial  judgment  task.  In  the  task  blocks,  participants  viewed  stimuli 
consisting of a dot located either above or below a horizontal bar. For each trial, participants decided whether 
the distance between the dot and the bar was farther or nearer relative to the length of a vertical reference line 
shown at the beginning of each block. In control blocks, dots appeared on both the left and right of the horizontal 
bar and participants were instructed to alternate finger presses during each trial. Trial duration=1750ms; Inter‐
trial interval=240ms (blank screen); 15 trials per block; 12 blocks of task as well as control; each of 2 fMRI run 
lasted  442s;  TR=2s;  36  axial  slices  parallel  to  AC‐PC  plane;  slice  thickness=4mm,  0.4mm  gap;  FOV=220mm; 
matrix size 64x64. While there were no significant cultural differences in accuracy, East Asians were faster than 

 

[15] 

Westerners, consistent with East Asians having more affinity for the relative judgments in this visuo‐spatial task. 
Cultural differences in task‐active regions, such as lateral frontal and parietal areas, were minimal. Importantly, 
in default regions, we found that Westerners had significantly greater deactivation than East Asians during the 
task  relative  to  the  control  condition  in  the  medial  frontal  and  right  hippocampus.  Taken  together,  these 
behavioral  and  neural  findings  suggest  that  East  Asians  may  require  less  effort  than  Westerners  when 
performing this task, and thus had less need to suppress default activity in between trials. Previous studies have 
shown that default‐network activity is associated with processing social information and self‐identity, and, for 
this  reason,  differences  in  the  social  and  self‐value  systems  across  cultural  groups  may  result  in  different 
default‐network function (Chiao et al., 2009). Our findings add to this notion by showing cultural differences in 
default‐network processing related to a more cognitive mechanism, and suggest a more general involvement of 
attention or effort for role culture plays in default‐network processing. Critically, our findings show that cultural 
differences  in  visual  processing  have  widespread  neural  effects  involving  visual,  fronto‐parietal,  and  now, 
default‐network regions as well.  
 
Culture shapes a mesolimbic response to signals of dominance and
subordination that associates with behavior Jonathan  B.  Freeman,  Tufts  University; 
Nicholas  O.  Rule,  Tufts  University;  Reginald  B.  Adams,  Jr.,  The  Pennsylvania  State  University;  Nalini  Ambady,  Tufts 
University‐ It has long been understood that culture shapes individuals’ behavior, but how this is accomplished in 
the human brain has remained largely unknown. The mesolimbic reward system likely plays an important role, 
yet it is unknown whether mesolimbic activity may be shaped by human culture. To examine this, we made use 
of  a  well‐  established  cross‐cultural  difference  in  behavior:  American  culture  tends  to  reinforce  dominant 
behavior whereas Japanese culture tends to reinforce subordinate behavior. In 17 Americans and 17 Japanese, 
we  assessed  behavioral  tendencies  towards  dominance/subordination  and  measured  neural  responses  using 
fMRI to dominant and subordinate stimuli. In the scanner, participants passively viewed images of dominant and 
subordinate  displays  of  the  body.  After  the  scan,  participants  completed  a  questionnaire  indexing  behavioral 
tendencies  towards  dominance/subordination  (e.g.,  "I  impose  my  will  on  others.").  In  Americans,  dominant 
stimuli selectively engaged the caudate nucleus, bilaterally, and the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), whereas 
these  same  regions  were  selectively  engaged  by  subordinate  stimuli  in  Japanese.  Correspondingly,  Americans 
self‐reported a tendency towards more dominant behavior, whereas Japanese self‐reported a tendency towards 
more  subordinate  behavior.  Moreover,  activity  in  the  right  caudate  and  mPFC  correlated  with  behavioral 
tendencies  towards  dominance/subordination,  such  that  stronger  responses  in  the  caudate  and  mPFC  to 
dominant  stimuli  were  associated  with  more  dominant  behavior  and  stronger  responses  in  the  caudate  and 
mPFC  to  subordinate  stimuli  were  associated  with  more  subordinate  behavior.  The  findings  provide  a  novel 
demonstration that culture can flexibly shape functional activity in the mesolimbic reward system, which in turn 
may guide social behavior. 
 
Minding their pain: Cultural variation in mentalizing region activity for
the emotional pain of ingroup relative to outgroup members- Bobby  K.  Cheon, 
Northwestern  University; Dong‐mi  Im,  Korea  Advanced  Institute  of  Science  and  Technology,  Tokiko  Harada, 
Northwestern University; J. Park  , Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology; Vani A. Mathur, Northwestern 
University;  Jason  Scimeca,  Northwestern  University;  HyunWook  Park,  Korea  Advanced  Institute  of  Science  and 
Technology; Joan Y. Chiao  , Northwestern University, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology‐ Empathy 
refers  to  the  capacity  to  understand  and  share  the  emotional  states  of  others.  Though  empathy  is  a  universal 
human  psychological  process,  the  component  processes  of  empathy  may  be  distinctly  modulated  by  cultural 
experience.  Cultures may vary in levels of preference and tolerance for social hierarchies, with prior research 
suggesting that hierarchy preference may be a powerful modulator of empathy and its neural correlates.  In the 
present  experiment,  we  investigated the influence  of cultural variations in hierarchy preference on the neural 
mechanisms underlying ingroup biases in empathy in native Koreans (K) and Caucasian‐Americans (CA) using 
cross‐cultural  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (CC‐fMRI)  at  3T.   During  scanning,  participants  viewed 
complex visual scenes of K and CA targets in emotionally painful or neutral situations and indicated how much 
empathy  they  felt  for  K  and  CA  targets.   Behaviorally,  K  participants  reported  greater  empathy  for  ingroup 
relative  to  outgroup  targets  compared  to  CA  participants.   Neuroimaging  revealed  that  across  both  cultures, 
mentalizing and perspective‐taking regions, such as the temporo‐parietal junction, medial prefrontal cortex, and 
posterior  cingulate  cortex  were  significantly  recruited  when  viewing  the  pain  of  ingroup  relative  to  outgroup 
members.  Moreover, K participants reported stronger hierarchy preferences and ingroup biases in empathy and 
exhibited  greater  activation  in  the  temporo‐parietal  junction  relative  to  CA  participants,  with  activity  in  this 
region mediating the relationship between hierarchy preference and reported ingroup biases in empathy.  These 
results suggest that mentalizing regions may play a critical role in group‐level biases in empathy, and cultural 
variations in mentalizing processes may underlie cultural variations in ingroup‐favoring biases in empathy.  

 

[16] 

 
Answering the ‘other’ question in cultural neuroscience: theory and data
on how culture gets into the brain- Elizabeth  A.  Reynolds  Losin,  University  of  California  Los 
Angeles; Marco Iacoboni, University of California Los Angeles; Alia Martin, University of California Los Angeles; Mirella 
Dapretto, University of California Los Angeles­ Cultural neuroscience (CN) is an emerging discipline that examines 
two questions fundamental to understanding human culture: how cultural experience shapes the brain and how 
the  brain  allows  the  acquisition  and  transmission  of  cultural  information.  To  date,  the  nascent  field  of  CN  has 
focused almost exclusively on the influence of differential cultural experience on the brain. In contrast, the even 
more  fundamental  process  of  cultural  acquisition  and  transmission  remains  neglected  by  neuroscientific 
inquiry. Fortunately, the tools needed to study the neural basis of cultural learning–anthropological theory and 
cognitive  neuroscience  methodology–already  exist;  they  are  merely  separated  by  disciplinary  boundaries. We 
bring tools from both disciplines to bear on a specific question: what are the neural underpinnings of cultural 
imitative  learning?  Anthropological  theories  of  cultural  learning  based  on  fieldwork,  computational  modeling, 
and  laboratory  experiments  suggest  that  sophisticated  imitation  abilities  are  at  the  core  of  human  cultural 
learning,  and  that  these  abilities  are  augmented  by  learning  biases,  mental  state  attribution,  and  flexible 
reinforcement learning. On the basis of current cognitive neuroscience research related to these four cognitive 
domains, we propose a preliminary model of the neural mechanisms underlying cultural imitative learning. Our 
model  has  the  mirror  neuron  system  (MNS)  and  associated  imitative  learning  areas  as  its  core.  We  further 
propose that the reward network may support both the motivation to imitate and the reinforcement sensitivity 
involved in cultural learning biases. Finally, MNS regions may support mental state attribution through motor 
simulation  while  medial  fronto‐parietal  areas  associated  with  mentalizing  may  contribute  to  mental  state 
attribution through an inferential route. To test this model, we have conducted the first study aimed explicitly at 
exploring the neural underpinnings of cultural imitative learning. Specifically, we have used fMRI to characterize 
the neural machinery of one important element of cultural imitative learning: the bias to learn from self‐similar 
individuals.  Unlike  typical  neuroimaging  studies  of  imitation  that  depict  an  isolated  effector  (e.g.  a  hand) 
performing simple actions, we have employed waist‐up videos of 12 actors of 3 ethnicities (African American, 
European American and Chinese) and 2 genders (male and female) performing unfamiliar, complex hand signs 
in  order  to  more  closely  mimic  real‐world  imitative  learning.  Study  participants  were  20  European  American 
young  adults.  While  in  the  scanner,  participants  imitated  and  observed  hand  sign  videos.  Control  conditions 
were still portraits of each actor (“identity” condition) and a fixation cross (baseline). We found more activity in 
the  reward  network  during  own‐  compared  to  other‐gender  imitation.  In  contrast,  the  MNS  and  other  higher 
motor regions, higher visual regions and medial fronto‐parietal regions were more active for other‐ than own‐
ethnicity imitation. These findings suggest that although the specific neural mechanisms underlying gender‐ and 
ethnic‐similarity biases may differ, in both cases the neural regions coding self‐similarity are components of our 
neural  model  of  cultural  imitative  learning.  While  these  data  begin  to  elucidate  the  neural  mechanisms  of  the 
acquisition and transmission of culture, future CN research will need to focus more attention on this question in 
order to fully characterize the neural dynamics of human culture. 
 
Neural mechanisms of self justification: Implications for cultural
variation in dissonance- Shinobu  Kitayama,  University  of  Michigan;  Hannah  Faye  Chua,  University  of 
Michigan; Steve Tompson, University of Michigan; Shihui Han, Penking University‐ After making a difficult decision, 
individuals are said to experience dissonance, which in turn motivates them to justify the decision. Yet, specific 
brain pathways for dissonance have yet to be fully understood. Here, we propose that the brain system is alerted 
when  a  decision  is  expected  to  be  private  and  thus  to  pose  a  threat  to  their  personal  self.  When  a  conflicted 
decision is made under this condition, the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) will detect the conflict, which in turn 
produces  aversive  somatic  experience  (as  indicated  by  an  increased  activation  of  the  anterior  insula  [AI]), 
resulting in dissonance arousal. To reduce the dissonance, the individuals will reconstruct the personal self so as 
to  justify  the  original  decision.  Importantly,  because  the  personal  self  is  more  elaborate  and  significant  in 
independent cultures (e.g., the US) than in interdependent cultures (e.g., Asia), this analysis is likely to be valid in 
the former, but not in the latter, cultures. We scanned 24 young healthy American participants while they rated their
preferences for various popular music CDs before and after making a series of private choices. CDs were paired
together such that the choices were either easy or difficult. As predicted by the proposal that choice justification is
motivated by dissonance, chosen CDs were liked more and rejected CDs were liked less (i.e., choice was justified) after
difficult choices, but no such preference change was observed after easy choices. Of importance, during the difficult
(vs. easy) choices, both the dorsal ACC and the AI were strongly activated. Moreover, the AI activation was reliably
correlated with an increased activation of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), which in turn predicted the post-choice
increase of liking for the chosen CDs, suggesting that a conflicted (i.e., difficult) choice produces dissonance as
realized in the activation of both ACC and AI, which in turn motivates the updating of self-relevant information (the
PCC activation) and the associated choice justification. In addition, underscoring the central significance of the
personal self in dissonance processes, the chosen (vs. rejected) CDs recruited a wide range of areas within the midline
default network including ventromedial prefrontal cortex and precuneus during the post-choice (vs. pre-choice) rating

 

[17] 

task.Curiously, the evidence here diverges substantially from the result from a similar study we conducted in China. In
the China study we found that choice justification is correlated, not with the midline self-related areas, but with lateral
frontal and central areas of the brain (areas associated with social and public realms). Thus, the brain operations
involved in dissonance are partially distinct in independent vs. interdependent cultures. In particular, in interdependent
cultures (e.g., China) dissonance is experienced as a threat to one’s public self and, as a consequence, the effort to
reduce dissonance might involve updating of the representations for one’s public self in general and one’s public
actions in particular. This analysis converges with recent theorizing in cultural neuroscience to suggest that culture is an
active element that shapes brain networks involved in cognitive dissonance.
 
 
 

 

[18] 

perceivers  have  about  categories  of  objects  and  animals.    Social 
psychologists  have  long  assumed  that  the  information  that 
perceivers  have  about  categories  of  peoplei.e.,  stereotypesis 
merely  another  domain  of  semantics.    Here,  we  evaluate  this 
assumption  against  recent  findings  regarding  the  neural  basis  of 
semantics, which suggest that two brain regionsleft inferior frontal 
gyrus  and  inferotemporal  cortexare  critical  for  semantic 
knowledge.    During  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging, 
participants  answered  questions  about  their  knowledge  of  both 
nonsocial and social categories.   Although left inferior frontal gyrus 
and  inferotemporal  cortex  were  activated  during  semantic 
judgments  of  nonsocial  categories,  these  regions  failed  to  respond 
above  baseline  during  judgments  of  social  categories.    Instead, 
judgments of social groups were associated with regions frequently 
linked  to  social  cognition,  including  medial  prefrontal  cortex, 
posterior  cingulate,  and  temporoparietal  junction.    Together,  these 
results suggest that beliefs about social groups should be considered 
distinct from other forms of semantic knowledge. 

Poster Session E
E1
Interactive Encoding of Emotional and Social
Relevance within the Human Amygdala  Pascal 
Vrtička, Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva; David 
Sander, Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva; Patrik 
Vuilleumier,  Department  of  Medicine,  University  of  Geneva  Thanks  to 
major  advances  in  neuroimaging  techniques  during  the  last  twenty 
years,  our  knowledge  about  the  main  functions  and  computational 
properties  of  the  human  amygdala  has  been  constantly  refined  and 
extended.  Being  initially  conceptualized  to  represent  a  basic  “fear 
module” and later on described to serve as an “arousal indicator”, it 
has  been  more  recently  proposed  to  meet  all  the  necessary 
prerequisites  for  a  “relevance  detector”.  Recent  evidence  speaks  in 
favor  of  the  latter  account,  as  the  human  amygdala  has  been  found 
activated  during  the  processing  of  various  kinds  of  information  – 
including  negative,  positive  and  even  neutral  stimuli –,  as  long  as  it 
was  relevant  for  the  goals,  needs  or  values  of  the  perceiver  at  a 
particular  moment  in  time.  This  was  either  related  to  specific  task 
instructions or individual differences in personality traits. Based on 
such an interpretation, researchers have started to ask the question 
whether  the  human  amygdala  would  differentiate  between  distinct 
kinds  of  relevance,  and  whether  the  latter  would  be  processed 
independently, additively, or even interactively. On the one hand, it is 
well  known  that  the  human  amygdala  preferentially  encodes 
emotional  versus  non‐emotional  information,  referred  here  as  to 
emotional relevance. On the other hand, recent evidence also shows 
that the human amygdala is more strongly activated by social versus 
non‐social  stimuli,  representing  what  one  may  call  social  relevance. 
Moreover,  some  investigations  already  suggest  an  interactive 
processing  of  emotional  and  social  relevance  within  the  human 
amygdala.  However,  as  the  latter  studies  only  used  emotional 
relevance in terms of emotional versus neutral information, they did 
not allow for characterizing interactive effects. In this new functional 
magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI)  study,  we  used  a  full  2  x  2 
factorial  design,  differentiating  between  emotional  (negative  and 
positive)  and  social  (social  and  nonsocial)  stimulus  content,  in 
addition  to  a  neutral  visual  baseline  condition.  Moreover,  we 
included  an  emotion  experience  and  two  emotion  regulation 
conditions (re‐appraisal and expressive suppression), and probed for 
the  influence  of  any  individual  differences  in  general  anxiety  and 
anxious attachment style. Our data confirmed previous accounts that 
the  human  amygdala  displays  a  basic  social  vs.  nonsocial  (social 
relevance)  and  an  additive  emotional  vs.  neutral  (emotional 
relevance) encoding pattern. Yet, more importantly, we could show – 
for the first time to our knowledge – a proper interactive emotional x 
social  relevance  encoding  pattern,  as  activity  was  bilaterally  not 
significantly  different  during  negative  and  positive  social  image 
perception,  but  higher  during  negative  vs.  positive  nonsocial  image 
processing.  This  pattern  was  not  affected  by  the  different  emotion 
regulation strategies and thus cognitive top‐down influence, but was 
modulated  by  general  anxiety  and  therefore  arousal,  as  it  was  only 
found  in  low  but  not  high  anxious  subjects.  Finally,  the  same 
emotional  x  social  relevance  interaction  was  found  in  three 
additional  cortical  regions  including  the  right  fusiform  gyrus,  right 
anterior  superior  temporal  gyrus,  and  medial  orbito‐frontal  cortex. 
Overall, these new findings reveal an interactive relevance encoding 
pattern  within  the  human  amygdala  and  three  additional  cortical 
brain  areas,  describing  an  elaborated  relevance  detection  system  in 
our species.

E3
The Emotions of Investments: fMRI Evidence for
the Influence of Unconscious Affect on
Financial Decisions Julie  L.  Hall,  University  of  Michigan; 
Richard Gonzalez, University of Michigan; Chandra Sripada, University of 
Michigan;  and  Oliver  C.  Schultheiss,  University  of  Michigan  ‐  The 
dominant  method  of  measuring  affect  in psychological  research  has 
been  explicit,  self‐report  measures.  More  recently,  implicit  and 
unconscious measures have been developed to assess emotions that 
respondents  may  not  be  able  to  report  or  that  are  outside  of 
conscious  awareness.  The  current  study  provides  evidence  for 
stronger unconscious than conscious affective influences on financial 
choices.  Using  fMRI,  24  participants  viewed  happy,  angry,  and 
neutral  affective  primes  presented  under  subliminal  and 
supraliminal conditions followed by a dynamic investment task.  Our 
results indicate that both subliminal and supraliminal presentations 
of  affective  primes  influence  financial  investment  decisions  and 
anticipatory  neural  activation  in  the  nucleus  accumbens.  As 
predicted,  participants  made  more  risky  investment  decisions  after 
happy  versus  neutral  primes.  They  also  showed  greater  nucleus 
accumbens  activation  after  happy  primes,  an  effect  that  was 
significantly  stronger  for  subliminal  versus  supraliminal  primes. 
Furthermore,  financial  risk‐taking  was  positively  correlated  with 
nucleus  accumbens  activation  during  happy  primes  whereas 
financial risk‐taking was negatively correlated with insula activation 
during angry primes.  Our results demonstrate that affect influences 
financial  investment  decisions  and  neural  markers  of  anticipatory 
arousal, particularly at an unconscious level.  Our findings imply that 
individuals  may  be  able  to  improve  the  quality  of  their  financial 
decisions  by  becoming  more  aware  of  their  affective  states  and 
learning  to  manage  affective  states  that  lead  to  suboptimal 
investment choices. 
 
E4
Ethnic identification associated with default
network activity when perceiving ethnic
ingroup members Vani  A.  Mathur,  Northwestern  University; 
Tokiko  Harada,  Northwestern  University;  Joan  Y.  Chiao,  Northwestern 
University  ­  The  neural  default  network  is  comprised  of  cortical 
midline  structures  including  the  medial  prefrontal  cortex  (MPFC), 
anterior  cingulate  cortex  (ACC),  and  posterior  cingulate  cortex 
(PCC).   This  network  has  been  shown  to  display  graded  activation 
associated  with  self‐referential  and  social  cognitive  processing.  
Despite the growing body of literature describing neural reactivity 
of  the  default  network  during  social  cognitive  processing,  how 

E2
Social Categories Juan  Manuel  Contreras,  Harvard  University; 
Mahzarin  R.  Banaji,  Harvard  University;  and  Jason  P.  Mitchell,  Harvard 
University‐ Semantic knowledge refers to the stored information that 

 

[19] 

intergroup  factors  such  as  group  membership,  identification,  and 
preference  affect  default  network  reactivity  remains  unknown.   In 
the  present  fMRI  study,  we  measured  neural  response  among 
African‐American  (AA)  and  Caucasian‐American  (CA)  participants 
while  viewing  AA  and  CA  targets  either  in  emotional  pain  or  not.  
Consistent  with  prior  behavioral  work,  AA  participants  self‐
reported  greater  ethnic  identification  relative  to  CA  participants.  
Neuroimaging  results  indicated  that  neural  reactivity  within 
cortical midline areas of the default network, including MPFC, ACC 
and  PCC,  was  greater  for  AA  relative  to  CA  participants  and  was 
associated  with  degree  of  ethnic  identification  during  the 
perception of ethnic ingroup members across conditions, relative to 
outgroup  members.   Moreover,  regression  analyses  performed  on 
independently  defined  regions  of  interest  revealed  that  degree  of 
ethnic  identification  predicted  activity  within  cortical  midline 
structures  when  viewing  ingroup  relative  to  outgroup  others.  
These  findings  suggest  that  ethnic  ingroup  identification  may 
modulate  the  extent  to  which  the  default  network  is  recruited  to 
understand ethnic ingroup members. 

associated  with  different  patterns  of  activity  in  emotion‐related 
regions  in  healthy  and  schizophrenia  subjects.  Overall,  we  aim  to 
further elucidate the role anhedonia plays in schizophrenic illness.    

E6
Physiological response to emotional faces in
patients with temporal lobe epilepsy Sarah Banks, 
Montreal  Neurological  Institute;  Jenny  Bellerose,  Montreal 
Neurological  Institute;  and  Marilyn  Jones‐Gotman,  Montreal 
Neurological  Institute‐In  various  neurological  and  psychiatric 
disorders,  deficits  in  emotional  response  are  associated  with 
abnormalities  in  amygdala  functioning.  Although  emotion 
recognition  itself  is  often  performed  well,  individuals  with 
neurological  or  psychiatric  conditions  are  often  found  to  have 
abnormal  autonomic  response  to  emotional  stimuli,  however  this 
has  rarely  been  assessed  as  a  function  of  amygdala  atrophy.  The 
purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between skin 
conductance responses and amygdala volume to emotional stimuli 
in  patients  with  medial  temporal  lobe  damage  compared  with 
healthy volunteers.The study involved two tasks: an implicit and an 
explicit  task.  The  implicit  task  was  presented  first  and  involved 
viewing  a  series  of  24  faces  that  expressed  one  of  six  emotions 
(happiness,  fear,  sadness,  anger,  disgust,  and  neutral).  Each  face 
was  presented  with  a  choice  of  two  ages  and  the  subject  had  to 
decide  which  number  best  represented  how  old  they  thought  the 
person  in  the  picture  was.  In  the  explicit  task,  the  subjects  were 
presented with similar pictures but for this task they had to choose 
which  of  two  emotion  labels  best  represented  the  face  on  the 
screen. During both tasks, electrodes were attached to the subjects’ 
fingers  on  both  hands  to  measure  skin  conductance  while 
responses  were  spoken.  Bilateral  recordings  are  not  the  norm  in 
this  field,  but  our  earlier  research  revealed  important  differences 
between  the  left  and  right  hands  in  skin  conductance  in  healthy 
volunteers.  In  patients  with  unilateral  temporal  lobe  pathology, 
these  lateralization  findings  may  become  even  more  relevant. 
Following  completion  of  the  tasks,  subjects  underwent  a  high 
resolution  structural  MRI  scan  in  a  3  Tesla  magnet.  After 
appropriate preprocessing of the scans, amygdalae were segmented 
manually 
and 
volumes 
calculated 
using 
inhouse 
software.Contrasting  with  the  classic  view  that  skin  conductance 
only  distinguishes  valenced  stimuli  from  neutral,  the  response 
profile  to  different  emotions  in  our  healthy  volunteers  showed  an 
interesting  pattern,  specifically  with  the  right  hand.  We  found 
higher  responses  to  “fight  or  flight”  emotions  such  as  fear  and 
disgust,  especially  when  the  data  was  presented  explicitly.  In 
comparison,  patients  with  epilepsy  primarily  affecting  their  left 
hemisphere  showed  atypical  responses:  Compared  with  their 
healthy  counterparts  they  showed  relatively  greater  response  to 
faces  depicting  sadness  in  our  implicit  task,  and  reduced  response 
to faces depicting disgust in the explicit task. As would be expected, 
amygdala volume in healthy control subjects was unrelated to skin 
conductance response to emotional faces.These initial results point 
to differences in reaction to certain emotions in patients with subtle 
damage  to  the  medial  temporal  lobe.  The  differences  most  likely 
reflect  structural  and  functional  changes  in  the  temporal  lobe 
emotion  circuitry.  The  nature  of  the  differences,  specifically 
heightened  reaction  to  sad  faces  in  patients  with  left  sided 
pathology, may underpin the exaggerated prevalence of depression 
in this patient population. 

E5
Is there an association between trait
anhedonia and neural activity in response
to emotional pictures in schizophrenia? An
fMRI investigation.  Brady  D.  Nelson,  University  of  Illinois  – 
Chicago; Ellen S. Herbener, University of Illinois – Chicago; and Olivia A. 
Bjorkquist,,  University  of  Illinois  –  Chicago‐  Anhedonia  is  a  hallmark 
affective  characteristic  of  schizophrenia  (Bleuler,  1911;  Harrow  et 
al.,  1977;  Kraeplin,  1913),  and  is  associated  with  significant 
functional  impairment  throughout  the  course  of  illness  (Herbener 
et  al.,  2005,  Blanchard  et  al.,  1998;  Fenton  and  McGlashan,  1994). 
However, it is still unclear what anhedonia actually reflects within 
schizophrenic  illness.  Multiple  studies  have  documented  that 
individuals  with  schizophrenia  whom  self‐report  anhedonia 
demonstrate normal responses to emotional stimuli at the moment 
of  exposure  as  indexed  by  both  self‐reports  of  response  (cf.,  Kring 
et  al.,  1993;  1996;  Herbener  et  al.,  2008)  and  emotion‐potentiated 
startle  (Curtis  et  al.,  1999).  Functional  imaging  studies  of  brain 
activity  in  response  to  emotional  stimuli  in  individuals  with 
schizophrenia  have  typically  reported  decreased  activity  in  brain 
regions  typically  involved  in  emotion  processing,  such  as  the 
amygdala  and  medial  prefrontal  cortex  (Takahashi  et  al.,  2004; 
Taylor  et  al.,  2005).  Recently,  Harvey  et  al.  (2010)  found  that  trait 
physical  anhedonia  was  associated  with  decreased  activity  in 
emotion‐related regions in both schizophrenic patients and healthy 
controls  (although  several  of  the  associations  were  significantly 
stronger in schizophrenic patients). However, Harvey et al. did not 
assess  online  emotions  ratings  and  only  examined  physical 
anhedonia.  Therefore,  we  aimed  to  replicate  and  extend  these 
findings  by  including  additional  measures  of  anhedonia  (general 
and  social),  measures  of  positive/negative  symptom  severity,  and 
online  emotion  ratings.  In  the  present  study,  participants  with 
schizophrenia  or  schizoaffective  disorder  (N  =  12)  and  healthy 
controls  (N  =  12)  underwent  a  functional  Magnetic  Resonance 
Imaging  (fMRI)  paradigm  where  they  viewed  and  rated  the 
intensity  of  their  emotional  responses  to  positive,  negative,  and 
neutral images. Groups were matched in age, sex, ethnicity, IQ, and 
parental  socioeconomic  status.  Prior  to  the  scan,  participants 
completed  self‐report  measures  of  general,  social,  and  physical 
anhedonia (Chapman et al., 1976), and symptom severity was rated 
with  the  Positive  and  Negative  Syndrome  Scale  (Kay,  Fiszbein,  & 
Opler, 1987). Structural and functional scans were acquired on a 3 
Tesla  scanner  (Signa,  General  Electric  Medical  System,  Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin)  at  the  University  of  Illinois  at  Chicago  Medical  Center. 
Data  was  processed  using  Analysis  of  Functional  NeuroImages 
software  (AFNI;  Cox,  1996).  Preliminary  results  indicate  that  the 
measures  of  anhedonia  and  positive/negative  symptoms  are 

 

E7
The
downward
V
is
an
emotionally
meaningful environmental cue: An eventrelated potential study Emily  Belleau,  University  of 

[20] 

Wisconsin‐Milwaukee;  Elizabeth  L.  Steuer,  University  of  Wisconsin‐
Milwaukee;  Michael  W.  Duke,  University  of  Wisconsin‐Milwaukee, 
Lindsay  M.  Kaad,  University  of  Wisconsin‐Milwaukee  &  Christine  L. 
Larson,  University  of  Wisconsin‐Milwaukee‐  Efficient  recognition  of 
salient  stimuli  that  signal  threat  to  the  individual  is  crucial  for 
survival. In parallel, research has shown that very simple stimulus 
properties  can  convey  meaningful  information  about  biologically 
relevant  stimuli.    For  example,  angular  geometric  patterns  tend  to 
be  associated  with  threat  and  curvilinear  forms  with  pleasantness 
(Bar & Neta, 2006).  The downward‐pointing V shape is embedded 
in  the  configuration  of  a  number  of  common  contextually  laden 
cues  of  threat,  including  the  eyebrows  in  an  angry  face,  fangs,  and 
knives.  To  clarify  the  underlying  features  that  are  perceived  in 
these  configural  affective  stimuli,  in  a  set  of  studies  we  stripped 
away  all  contextual  information  and  presented  the  simple 
geometric  forms  (e.g.,  literally  a  “V”  or  a  circle)  that  appeared  to 
convey  emotion  in  natural  environments.  In  brief,  semantic 
differential ratings revealed that downward V forms were rated as 
more  “bad”  and  circles  and  curvilinear  forms  were  rated  as  more 
“good” (Aronoff et al., 1992; Larson, 2007). The current study adds 
to  this  literature  by  using  event‐related  potentials  (ERPs)  to 
examine  whether  the  downward  V  would  be  more  emotionally 
salient, compared to the passive viewing of other simple geometric 
shapes  as  measured  by  the  P300  and  the  Late  Positive  Potential 
(LPP).    We  hypothesized  that  the  downward  V  would  produce 
higher  P300  and  LPP  waves,  compared  to  circle  and  upward  V 
shapes.  Twenty‐five  participants  passively  viewed  downward  V, 
upward V, and circle stimuli on a computer screen for 200 ms each 
while  64  channels  of  EEG  were  recorded.    The  geometric  stimuli 
were randomized with a total of 180 trials. Separate within subjects 
ANOVAs  and  post‐hoc  comparisons  were  conducted  for  P3  (280‐
450  ms)  and  LPP  (350‐750  ms)  at  channel  POz.  P3  and  LPP 
amplitudes  were  significantly  influenced  by  geometric  shape,  such 
that  amplitudes  for  both  components  were  significantly  higher  for 
the downward V compared to the upward V (p=.02 for P3, p=.01 for 
LPP). Additionally, significant differences in P3 were found between 
the downward V and the circle (p=.05), with higher P3 amplitudes 
for  the  downward  V.  The  findings  suggest  that  the  downward  V  is 
more  emotionally  salient  than  other  common  geometric  shapes 
found  in  the  environment.    Although  the  passive  viewing  of  the 
circle  shape  did  not  produce  significantly  higher  P3  or  LPP 
amplitudes  compared  to  the  upward  or  downward  V,  circles  may 
convey emotional meaning as they are associated with infant faces 
and  elicit  caregiving  behaviors  (Lorenz,  1943;  Zebrowitz,  1992).  
This  study  further  informs  research  establishing  the  downward  V 
as a meaningful environmental cue.       

between  the  observer  and  the  model  played  a  role  in  mediating 
social  attention.  To  assess  whether  the  modulation  of  this 
automatic  behaviour  by  political  affiliation  can  be  used  as  a 
predictor in elections, we tested 48 subjects during a local election 
campaign  in  Italy  in  which  competed  two  candidates  of  the  two 
main  coalitions  (centre‐left‐wing  and  centre‐right‐wing).  We  used 
these two candidates as distracting gaze models in a variation of a 
Posner’s  spatial  cuing  paradigm  in  which  participants  had  to 
perform  the  task  using  their  own  gaze.  Distracters  gaze  direction 
could be equi‐probably congruent or incongruent with the one cued 
by  the  imperative  signal  that  shortly  (75  msec)  followed  them. 
Gaze‐following behaviour was computed as the difference between 
accuracy  in  spatially  incongruent  trials  and  spatially  congruent 
ones.  Participants  rated  themselves  on  the  Five  Factors  of 
personality  using  a  list  of  25  adjectives  and  provided  their 
perceptions  of  the  two  candidates  using  the  same  list.  We  used 
these  measures  in  order  to  compute  the  perceived  similarity 
between the experimental  subjects and each of the models. Finally, 
we  collected  also  their  implicit  attitude  by  using  the  Implicit 
association  test  (IAT),  a  reliable  measure  of  implicit  attitudes  that 
has  been  shown  to  predict  election  outcomes  in  undecided  voters. 
We  expected  that  both  IAT  and  gaze‐following  strength  uniquely 
predict  voting  intention.We  entered  the  vote  intention  as 
dependent  variable  and  the  gaze‐following  behaviour  and  IAT 
scores  as  predictors.  Multiple  regression  reached  significance  and 
both  IAT  and  Gaze‐following  predict  intention  vote.  Moreover, 
perceived similarity correlated with the gaze‐following at least for 
the  most  known  candidate.  No  such  correlation  with  IAT  was 
found.The  results  suggest  that  the  social  attention  catching  power 
exerted  by  the  gaze  of  a  politician  on  the  gaze  of  an  observer  is  a 
predictor of voting intentions. Data also suggest that gaze following 
deals  with  perceived  similarity  both  in  terms  of  personality  and 
political affiliation. 
E9
Social Status Modulates Neural Activity in
the Mentalizing Network Keely  A.  Muscatell, 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES; Emily Falk, UNIVERSITY OF 
CALIFORNIA,  LOS  ANGELES;  Sylvia  A.  Morelli,  UNIVERSITY  OF 
CALIFORNIA,  LOS  ANGELES;  Baldwin  M.  Way,  UNIVERSITY  OF 
CALIFORNIA,  LOS  ANGELES;  Jennifer  H.  Pfeifer,  University  of  Oregon; 
Matthew  D.  Lieberman,  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  LOS  ANGELES 
Naomi  I.  Eisenberger,  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  LOS  ANGELES;  and 
Mirella Dapretto, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES‐ Previous 
research  has  suggested  that  social  status  may  influence  an 
individual’s  tendency  to  think  about  the  minds  of  others 
(mentalize)  or  to  take  their  perspective.  Specifically,  individuals 
who  are  low  in  status  are  more  likely  to  adopt  the  perspective  of 
another person, and perform better on mentalizing tasks, compared 
to  high  status  individuals  (Galinsky,  2006;  Rutherford,  2004).  To 
the extent that low status individuals are more dependent on high 
status individuals for resources, it may be adaptive for those low in 
status to pay more attention to and care more about understanding 
how  others  are  likely  to  think  and  behave.  However,  no  known 
studies  have  investigated  whether  social  status  modulates  neural 
activity  in  brain  regions  involved  in  perspective‐taking  and 
mentalizing.  In  Study  1,  17  young  adults  completed  a  measure  of 
social  status,  and  were  scanned  using  fMRI  while  they  viewed  a 
photo  of  a  person  and  read  a  passage  supposedly  written  by  the 
individual in the photo. Results revealed that individuals with lower 
social status showed greater neural activity in a network of neural 
regions  known  to  be  involved  in  perspective‐taking  and 
mentalizing—including  the  dorsomedial  PFC  (dmPFC),  medial  PFC 
(mPFC),  precuneus/posterior  cingulate,  posterior  superior 
temporal  sulcus  (pSTS)  and  temporoparietal  junction  (TPJ)  (p  < 
.001, 20 voxels). In Study 2, we sought to replicate this effect in an 
adolescent  sample,  using  a  less  circumscribed  task.  Twenty‐seven 

E8
Proneness to the gaze of politicians and
implicit attitude predict voting intention M.T. 
Liuzza,  Università  di  Roma,  Istituto  di  Ricovero  e  Cura  a  Carattere 
Scientifico Fondazione Santa Lucia; M. Vecchione, Università di Roma; 
F.  Dentale,  Università  di  Roma;  F.  Crostella,  Università  di  Roma;  G.V. 
Caprara, Università di Roma; S.M. Aglloti, Università di Roma, Istituto 
di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Fondazione Santa Lucia‐ Gaze 
is  one  of  the  most  powerful  social  signals  used  to  manipulate 
others’  attention.  Indeed,  humans  automatically  attend  where 
others  are  attending  to  and  gaze  following  may  be  a  reflexive 
behaviour that, in some circumstances, occurs independently from 
a follower’s will.  The attention catching power of others’ gaze may 
be  underpinned  by  subcortical  neural  pathways  that  mediate 
coarse but fast orienting to salient stimuli. Yet, evidence in monkeys 
indicates  that  this  behaviour  is  not  impervious  to  higher  order 
variables  such  as  indexes  of  social  rank  and  hierarchy  in  humans. 
For  example,  we  have  demonstrated  that  human  observers  are 
more attracted by the distracting gaze of in‐group rather than out‐
group  politicians.  Moreover,  we  found  that  perceived  similarity 

 

[21] 

adolescents  (age  =  13  years)  were  scanned  while  they  passively 
viewed  emotional  facial  expressions;  participants’  parents  also 
completed  measures  of  social  status.  Again,  results  revealed  a 
negative  correlation  between  social  status  and  neural  activity  in 
mentalizing  regions—such  as  the  dmPFC  and  precuneus—as  well 
as the amygdala (p < .001, 10 voxels). Results from Study 2 replicate 
and  extend  the  results  of  Study  1,  together  suggesting  that,  across 
developmental  periods  and  during  distinct  tasks,  individuals  who 
are  lower  in  social  status  show  greater  activity  in  brain  regions 
involved in understanding the minds of others. 

emotion processing in the response to emotional distraction. These 
findings  shed  light  on  the  impact  of  emotional  distraction  on 
perception and have relevance for clinical conditions characterised 
by increased susceptibility to emotional distraction. 
E11
An fMRI Study of Anticipation: Is the Journey
More Important Than the Destination? Sarah  E. 
Henderson,  Dartmouth  College;  and  Catherine  J.  Norris,  Dartmouth 
College‐ Previous research has investigated the neural substrates of cued
anticipation and experienced monetary outcomes (Knutson & Greer,
2008); however, a study exploring how multiple competing gain or loss
outcomes might impact anticipation and expectancy has yet to be
conducted. In the current experiment, we sought to bridge the
literatures on (a) anticipation of monetary outcomes and (b) violations
in outcome expectancy by investigating the difference between the
anticipation of receiving a monetary reward or loss and the experience
of actually obtaining the greatest possible reward or loss when multiple
outcomes were possible. Using an event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) design, participants (N = 30) were presented
with two facedown cards and the stakes (i.e., monetary gains or losses)
associated with the cards. The stakes were either two possible gain
outcomes (win $5 vs. win $25) or two possible loss outcomes (lose $25
vs. lose $5). Upon choosing a card, participants learned the outcome
and its impact on their starting endowment of $10. A whole brain
analysis comparing neural responses during anticipation of a win to
those following the attainment of the greatest possible reward (e.g., win
$25 instead of win $5) revealed that anticipation produced greater
activation of primary and secondary visual areas as well as premotor,
motor, and somatovisceral areas than did actual experience. This
pattern suggests that during anticipation, participants are engaging in
increased mobilization of resources to attend to stimuli and prepare to
make decisions. The pattern for losses was very similar. However, a
comparison of anticipation of loss versus receiving the worst possible
monetary outcome also revealed increased activation in BA 39 and
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. BA 39 has previously been associated
with experiencing unpleasant stimuli and with a negativity bias, such
that losses receive more attention and elicit stronger emotional
responses than do wins; while dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has been
implicated in self regulation and behavioral inhibition. In addition,
anticipation of reward produced more activation of bilateral
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) than did receiving the best possible
monetary outcome, consistent with this region’s role in reward
anticipation. These findings suggest that, in addition to replicating
previous findings on anticipation of monetary outcomes, anticipation
may have stronger effects on the mobilization of resources than does
actual experience. Further research investigating how an individual’s
expectations to win or lose when reward or punishment are imminent
may better explain the differences between anticipation and experience.

E10
Functional MRI Investigation of the role of
processing
load,
emotional
content,
distraction time, and individual differences
in the impact of distraction on a visual
perceptual task Andrea  T.  Shafer,  University  of  Alberta;  and 
Florin  Dolcos,  University  of  Alberta  According  to  Lavie  (2005),  task‐
irrelevant  distractors  in  perceptual  tasks  have  differential  impact 
on task‐relevant processing depending on the processing load (PL) 
of the main task – i.e., low PL is susceptible to distraction whereas 
high  PL  eliminates  distraction.  Previous  research  with  emotional 
distraction  has  shown  that  high  PL  eliminates  or  significantly 
diminishes  emotional  distraction,  suggesting  that  selective 
attention  resources  are  necessary  for  the  processing  of  emotional 
stimuli  (Pessoa  et  al,  2002,  2005,  2007).  While  it  effectively 
manipulated  PL,  this  research  failed  to  consider  the  degree  of 
emotional  content  (EC)  of  the  distractors.  Thus,  it  is  possible  that 
high  PL  may  have  less  of  an  effect  on  task‐irrelevant  distraction 
when  the  distracters  are  highly  emotional.  Furthermore,  although 
previous  research  with  non‐emotional  distractors  has  found  high 
PL  eliminates  individual  differences  in  distractibility  (Forster  & 
Lavie,  2007),  this  effect  was  not  observed  in  individuals  with  high 
social anxiety (Moriya & Tanno, 2010), suggesting that the effect of 
PL  on  task‐irrelevant  distraction  depends  on  certain  individual 
differences  affecting  emotion  processing.  These  ideas  were 
investigated using a shape discrimination (SD) task in which PL, EC, 
and distraction time (DT) were manipulated, and personality traits 
affecting  general  distractibility  (i.e.  attentional  control)  and 
emotion  processing  (i.e.  neuroticism,  social  anxiety)  were  also 
assessed.  Event‐related  fMRI  data  were  collected  from  18 
participants.  Repeated  measures  ANOVAs  with  three  factors  (PL, 
EC, DT), performed of reaction time (RT) data, revealed main effects 
of  PL  (longer  RT  for  high  PL)  and  EC  (longer  RT  for  emotional 
distractors).  Also,  when  examining  distractors  with  the  most 
dissimilar EC an  EC x DT interaction was found when PL was low, 
showing  that  the  impact  of  distraction  was  the  strongest  when  EC 
was  highest,  and  resources  were  the  least  taxed  by  the  main  task. 
Paralleling these findings, analysis of fMRI data showed that activity 
in  the  anterior  cingulate  cortex  (ACC)  was  the  strongest  when  EC 
was  the  highest  and  resources  were  the  least  taxed.  This  finding 
suggests  that  when  more  resources  were  available  for  distraction, 
more conflict between task‐relevant (cognitive) and task‐irrelevant 
(emotion)  processing  occurred.  These  results  are  consistent  with 
the  ACC  role  in  conflict  monitoring  and  in  emotion‐cognition 
integration. Together these results show that PL affects the amount 
of  emotional  distraction,  in  that  when  PL  is  minimal  emotional 
distraction  is  maximal.  Moreover,  investigation  of  the  role  of 
individual differences showed that various personality traits affect 
distraction  differentially  depending  on  the  amount  of  resources 
present  at  the  time  of  distraction.  Specifically,  lack  of  attentional 
control was linked to worse performance when the largest amount 
of resources were available, whereas heightened social anxiety and 
neuroticism  were  linked  to  worse  performance  when  minimal 
resources  were  available.  Collectively,  these  findings  reconcile 
opposing views of emotional distraction on perception and point to 
the  role  of  individual  differences  in  general  distractibility  and 

 

E12
Trait alexithymia is related to decreased
activity in a cognitive control/language
network
but
increased
activity
in
a
cognitive control/inhibitory network when
making
more
granular
judgments
of
emotional states. J. Shu, Columbia University; A. B. Stapute, 
Columbia  University;  j.  Weber,  Columbia  University;  and  K.  Ochsner, 
Columbia  University­  Alexithymia  is  a  trait  reflecting  the  degree  to 
which  individuals  have  difficulty  expressing  emotions  through 
language.  Recent  research  indicates  that  alexithymics  may  use  the 
same  number  of  words  in  describing  their  emotional  experiences, 
but  are  less  nuanced  in  their  descriptions.  This  suggests  that 
alexithymics may be particularly impaired when having to express 
themselves  in  a  nuanced  and  granular  fashion.   To  test  this 
experimentally,  we  manipulated  the  degree  to  which  individuals 
varying  in  their  level  of  alexithymia  could  use  a  more  or  less 

[22] 

granular  method  of  assessing  their  emotions.   Participants  viewed 
evocative  images  and  judged  their  emotional  response  in  either  a 
categorical  way,  choosing  among  options  of  “good”,  “neutral”,  and 
“bad”, or in a continuous way, by sliding a marker to any location on 
a scale ranging from “good” to “bad”.  Because the poles of the scale 
were identical in both conditions, they differed only in the degree of 
granularity  required  in  judging  one’s  emotional  response. 
Behaviorally, trait alexithymia was related to longer response times 
in  the  continuous  condition,  but  not  in  the  category  condition. 
Neurally,  in  the  continuous  condition  alexithymia  was  negatively 
related  to  activity  in  left  ventrolateral  prefrontal  cortex  and 
superior  frontal  sulcus  ‐  regions  related  to  controlled  retrieval  of 
information  from  semantic  memory  and  cognitive  control  more 
generally.   Alexithymia  also  was  positively  related  to  activity  in 
right  ventrolateral  prefrontal  cortex,  a  region  also  involved  in 
cognitive  control  but  more  associated  with  inhibitory  processes.  
Together,  these  results  suggest  that  the  emotional  difficulties 
alexithymics  face  specifically  depend  on  the  granularity  of  the 
response  modality  and  that  expressing  one’s  self  using  simple 
verbal  categories  may  actually  reduce  the  difficulty  of  indicating 
emotional feelings in alexithymics. 

to  situations  involving  social  threat,  and  therefore  responds 
differentially to external stimuli based on the presence or absence 
of  such  a  threat.    We  used  event‐related  functional  magnetic 
resonance  imaging  (fMRI)  to  examine  how  emotional  and  social 
responses are affected by anticipated future social acceptance.  In a 
between‐subjects  design,  we  manipulated  affective  state  by 
providing participants with fictitious feedback indicating that their 
futures  would  be  filled  with  long‐lasting,  stable  relationships 
(future belonging) or that they would be isolated and lonely (future 
isolation).    Twenty‐eight  participants  (14  in  each  affective  state) 
were  then  imaged  while  they  viewed  pictures  selected  from  the 
International  Affective  Picture  System  (IAPS)  that  varied  on 
dimensions of sociality (social or non‐social) and emotional valence 
(negative,  neutral,  positive).    Compared  to  anticipated  future 
belonging,  anticipated  future  isolation  resulted  in  (1)  lower  left 
amygdala  activity  to  negative  pictures  and  (2)  higher  left  medial 
PFC  (BA10)  activity  to  positive  pictures.    Taken  together,  these 
results provide evidence of a shift in the neural response to external 
stimuli following an exclusionary social threat.   

E13

Brain Mechanisms For Processing Social
Exclusion and Rule Violation in Children
with Autism Spectrum Disorder Danielle  Z.  Bolling, 
Yale  University;  Naomi  B.  Pitskel,  Yale  University;  Ben  Deen,  Yale 
University;  Michael  J.  Crowley,  Yale  University;  James  C.  McPartland, 
Yale  University;  Kevin  A.  Pelphrey,  Yale  University‐  Social  exclusion 
inherently  involves  an  element  of  expectancy  violation,  in  that  we 
expect  other  people  to  follow  the  unwritten  rule  to  include  us  in 
social  interactions.  In  this  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging 
(fMRI) study, we employed a unique modification of an interactive 
virtual  ball‐tossing  game  called  “Cyberball”  (Williams,  Cheung,  & 
Choi,  2000)  and  a  novel  paradigm  called  “Cybershape”,  in  which 
rules  are  broken  in  the  absence  of  social  exclusion,  to  dissociate 
brain  regions  that  process  social  exclusion  from  rule  violations 
more  generally.  In  typical  adults,  we  replicated  prior  findings  of 
ventral  anterior  cingulate  cortex  (vACC),  insula,  and  posterior 
cingulate  cortex  activity  evoked  by  social  exclusion  relative  to 
inclusion. Comparing social exclusion and rule violation revealed a 
functional  dissociation  in  the  active  neural  systems  as  well  as 
differential  functional  connectivity  with  vACC.  Some  structural 
overlap was observed in regions differentially modulated by social 
exclusion and rule violation, including the vACC and lateral parietal 
cortex.  Looking  at  social  exclusion  and  rule  violation  in  children 
with  and  without  autism  spectrum  disorder  (ASD),  we  found 
regional  differences  in  brain  responses  to  exclusion  between 
groups  in  the  vACC.  Again  comparing  between  groups  in  brain 
responses  to  rule  violation,  we  found  differential  activation  in  the 
insula. In a whole brain comparison of activation to social exclusion 
versus  rule  violation,  typically  developing  children  showed 
extensive  amounts  of  significantly  different  activation,  while 
children  with  ASD  showed  vastly  fewer  differences.  Compared  to 
behavioral  data  collected  showing  that  self‐reported  distress 
following  exclusion  was  comparable  between  children  with  and 
without  ASD,  our  data  suggest  that  children  with  ASD  respond  to 
social  exclusion  in  a  way  that  is  more  similar  to  their  response  to 
rule  violation,  compared  to  typical  children  and  adults.  From  this 
we  draw  the  conclusion  that  children  with  ASD  are 
disproportionately affected by the expectancy violation inherent in 
the  experience  of  exclusion  compared  to  typically  developing 
children and adults. 

E15

Prediction-Error in the Context of Real
Social Relationships Modulates the Reward
System- Joshua  C.  Poore,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles; 
Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University of Oregon; Elliot T. Berkman, University of 
Oregon;  Tristen  K.  Inagaki,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  B. 
Locke  Welborn,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  Matthew  D. 
Lieberman,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles‐  Mounting  evidence 
demonstrates  that  the  human  reward  system  is  sensitive  to  social 
rewards.  Given  the  link  between  the  systemsʼ  associative  learning 
functions and reward processing, these findings imply a central role 
for  it  in  the  development  of  social  attachments.  Yet,  it  remains 
unclear whether the reward system processes social rewards in the 
same  way  that  it  does  primary  rewards  (e.g.,  food  and  sex)  and 
whether its activity is meaningfully related to representations (e.g., 
attachment  security,  trust)  and  affect  (e.g.,  romantic  passion) 
associated  with  social  attachments.  This  study  examined  whether 
the  reward  system  evidences  a  characteristic  prediction‐error 
signal  that  is  selective  to  reward  gains/losses  in  the  context  of 
social  reward  and  whether  such  activity  is  also  related  to 
representations  of  attachment  security  and  trust.  Seventeen 
subjects in romantic relationships were scanned (fMRI) while their 
expectations  for  their  partnersʼ  positive  regard  of  them  and  their 
relationships  were  either  confirmed  or  violated,  in  both  positive 
and  negative  directions,  trial‐by‐trial.  Social  reward  findings  here 
are  consistent  with  prediction‐error  research;  analyses  revealed 
significant ventral tegmental area activity in positive violation trials 
relative  to  confirmatory  trials,  and  diminished  activity  in  negative 
violation  trials  relative  to  confirmatory  trials.  Also,  the  latter 
revealed  posterior  ventral  striatum  activation  consistent  with 
previous  research  on  financial  loss.  Finally,  postscan  reports  of 
attachment  security  and  trust  were  associated  with  non‐
confirmatory  responses  in  reward  system  regions;  activations 
during  positive  violation  trials  were  associated  with  increased 
attachment anxiety and decreased trust. 
E14
Neural
Responses
to
Anticipated
Social
Isolation Katherine  E.  Powers,  Dartmouth  College;  Catherine  J. 
Norris,  Dartmouth  College;  and  Todd  F.  Heatherton,  Dartmouth 
College­  Previous  research  has  suggested  that  humans  have  a 
fundamental  need  for  interpersonal  relationships,  and  that  this 
need  to  belong  evolved  as  an  adaptive  mechanism  to  promote 
survival.  This theory proposes that the brain is especially sensitive 

 

E16
Don’t Sweat the Small Stuff: Age Differences in
the Positivity Offset-Kristin  W.  Flanary,  Dartmouth 
College;  and  Catherine  J.  Norris,  Dartmouth  College­The  positivity 

[23] 

offset  refers  to  the  tendency  for  responses  to  mildly  pleasant 
stimuli  to  be  stronger  than  responses  to  mildly  unpleasant.  This 
offset  may  increase  with  age,  as  older  adults  attend  to  and 
remember  more  positive  information  than  younger  adults.  We 
investigated  age  differences  in  the  positivity  offset  and  its 
underlying  behavioral  and  neural  mechanisms.  We  collected 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) as older (age 65‐80) 
and  younger  (age  18‐25)  women  viewed  pleasant  and  unpleasant 
IAPS  images.  Participants  viewed  the  images  again  outside  of  the 
fMRI  scanner  and  made  positive  and  negative  ratings  of  each. 
Reaction  times  for  these  ratings  were  also  recorded.  Compared  to 
younger adults, older adults’ ratings showed an increased positivity 
offset.  We  then  conducted  a  whole‐brain  voxelwise  regression 
analysis  using  this  behavioral  positivity  offset  to  predict  brain 
regions associated with a neural positivity offset (greater activation 
to  mildly  pleasant  than  mildly  unpleasant  images).  This  analysis 
revealed significant activation of left superior frontal gyrus (BA 10) 
across all subjects. Older adults showed greater activation of BA 10 
and slower response times to mildly unpleasant images than mildly 
pleasant; they also showed greater activation and slower response 
times  to  mildly  unpleasant  images  than  younger  adults.  Results 
suggest  that  regulation  of  negative  responses  to  mildly  emotional 
stimuli underlies older adults’ increased positivity offset. This may 
have  adaptive  implications,  preventing  them  from  “sweating  the 
small stuff” in life. 

examined areas that were negatively connected with the left amygdala
using the identify emotion vs. match emotion contrast to assess which
brain regions’ connections are differentially affected by linguistic
categorization (“labeling”) of emotional stimuli vs. perceptually
matching (“affective match”) such stimuli. All image preprocessing and
statistical analyses were performed in SPM8 (results thresholded at
p<.005 uncorrected, cluster size (k)= 5 voxels). Between-group results
revealed greater negative functional connectivity between the left
amygdala and right VLPFC in control subjects vs. BD II depressed
subjects during labeling versus matching of emotional faces (BA47,
MNI: [51 44 -10], peak-level p<0.001, k=14). In the reverse
comparison, between-group results also revealed greater negative
functional connectivity between amygdala and ventral anterior cingulate
(BA24: [-9 32 -1], peak-level p<0.001, k=8) in the BD II group relative
to controls. These findings are consistent in direction with the
functional connectivity results previously seen by our group in mania
and suggest a trait-related dysfunction of this frontolimbic circuit in BD
II depression.
E18
The
intrinsic
reward
value
of
communicating about the self- Diana Tamir, Harvard 
University;  and  Jason  Mitchell,  Harvard  University  Humans 
communicate about themselves quite often, and to a wide range of 
audiences.  Why  do  humans  so  readily  reveal  information  about 
their  own  thoughts  and  feelings?  Here  we  used  functional 
neuroimaging to test the prediction that people communicate about 
the  self  because  doing  so  provides  intrinsic  rewards.  During  fMRI 
scanning,  participants  shared  information  about  the  personality 
characteristics  (n =  117)  or  preferences  (n =  78)  of  either 
themselves  (Self  trials),  or  another  person  (Other  trials).  To  test 
whether participants experienced greater reward when answering 
questions  about  the  self  than  about  others,  we  compared  neural 
activity for Self > Other trials in regions associated previously with 
coding  reward  and  value.  Using  both  whole‐brain  random  effects 
analyses  and  independently  localized  regions,  we  identified 
significantly  more  activity  during  Self  than  Other  trials  in  a  set  of 
neural  regions  previously  implicated  in  reward  processing:  the 
nucleus  accumbens,  ventral  tegmental  area,  and  orbitofrontal 
cortex.  This  activity  accompanied  self‐sharing  about  both 
personality  characteristics  and  preferences  and  did  not  change 
based  on  positivity  associated  with  either  the  response  or  the 
stimulus.  These  findings  suggest  that  the  human  tendency  to 
communicate  about  their  thoughts  and  feelings  may  arise,  in  part, 
from the intrinsic value of thinking and talking about the self. 

E17
Fronto-limbic Functional Connectivity in
Bipolar II Depression during Emotion Labeling
Salvatore  Torrisi,  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  LOS  ANGELES;  Nathalie 
Vizueta,  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  LOS  ANGELES;  Elliot  Berkman, 
University  of  Oregon;  Lara  Foland‐Ross,  University  of  California,  Los 
Angeles;  Jennifer  D.  Townsend,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles; 
Teena  D.  Moody,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  Jeffrey  Fischer, 
University of California, Los Angeles Susan Y. Bookheimer, University of 
California,  Los  Angeles;  and  Lori  L.  Altshuler,  University  of  California, 
Los  Angeles,  VA  Greater  Los  Angeles  Healthcare  System  Bipolar
disorder (BD) is a serious psychiatric illness characterized by chronic
mood episodes, from depression to either mania (BD I) or hypomania
(BD II), that causes marked impairment in functioning. Such
pathological mood states suggest dysfunction in a regulatory circuit.
The current study examined implicit emotion regulation in BD II
depressed and control subjects using the affect labeling paradigm. We
used a psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis to investigate
patterns of functional connectivity during the psychological task
conditions. Previous work using PPI analysis in healthy subjects has
shown that, during the condition of linguistic emotion face labeling, the
ventral lateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) becomes active and
negatively functionally correlated with amygdala activation (Hariri, et
al., 2000). A negative correlation is thought to represent a top-down
modulatory influence of VLPFC on this limbic region, and comprise a
form of implicit emotion regulation. In previous studies by our group,
manic, depressed and also euthymic BD I subjects had reductions in
OFC activation, suggesting a trait-related deficit. A PPI analysis
demonstrated that this fronto-limbic inhibitory connection was reduced
in mania relative to controls (Foland-Ross, et al., 2008). Here, we
hypothesized that BD depressed subjects would demonstrate reduced
VLPFC-amygdala connectivity, similar to the pattern seen in manic
subjects. 3T fMRI data were collected on 17 medication-free BD II
depressed subjects (7F, 36.0 ± 8.7 years) and 17 control subjects (7F,
38.5 ± 9.7 years). During scanning, subjects were presented with 3
experimental blocks named “match emotion,” “identify emotion,” and
“match forms” (Hariri, et al., 2000). We functionally defined a left
amygdala seed ROI from the group average of all 34 subjects in the
match emotion vs. match forms conditions (a contrast known to show
robust amygdala activation), and used activity in this seed to generate a
PPI. We derived the interaction between this variable and the time
series of the psychological blocks from their product. We then

 

E19
Social Working Memory M.L.  Meyer,  University  of 
California, Los Angeles; R. P. Spunt, University of Oregon; L.T. Rameson, 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  M.D.  Lieberman,  University  of 
California,  Los  Angeles‐  This  investigation  examined  whether 
neurocognitive  evidence  exists  for  social  working  memory. 
Previous  research  has  shown  that  a  set  of  neural  regions,  notably 
the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), tempoparietal junction (TPJ), 
posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) and temporal poles (TP), 
consistently  engage  when  people  think  about  the  characteristics 
and  beliefs  of  other  people  (e.g.  Frith  &  Frith,  2003;  2006). 
However,  to  date,  no  studies  have  examined  whether  these  neural 
structures  involved  in  social  cognition  generally  function  like  a 
working  memory  system  such  that  their  responses  are  modulated 
by  social  working  memory  load.   We  developed  a  new  paradigm 
based  on  previous  working  memory  delay  response  tasks 
(D’Esposito  et  al.,  1999)  to  test  the  neural  basis  of  social  working 
memory. While undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI), participants completed trials in which they considered two, 
three, or four of their friends’ traits, such as ‘funny,’ during a delay 

[24] 

period.  Parametric  analyses  showed  a  linear  increase  in  activation 
in social cognition (DMPFC, TP, pSTS, rTPJ) and traditional working 
memory  regions  (DLPFC,  SPL)(D’Esposito  et  al.,  1999;  Wager  & 
Smith,  2003)  during  the  delay  period  as  participants  considered 
traits for an increasing amount of friends. The findings suggest that 
regions previously implicated in social cognitive processing seem to 
be sensitive to the amount of social working memory load involved 
in  a  task.    Taken  together,  these  data  suggest  that  social  working 
memory  relies  on  both  domain‐specific  social  cognitive  neural 
regions as well as domain‐general regions previously implicated in 
working memory. 

counterfactual  processes  in  the  brain  is  limited.  The  present  fMRI 
study explores these processes by directly comparing the imagining 
of  upward  counterfactuals  (creating  better  outcomes  for  negative 
past  events)  with  the  recall  of  negative  past  events  and  the 
imagining  of  positive  future  events.  Results  show  a  large  overlap 
with  episodic  past  and  future  thinking  in  the  medial  temporal‐
parietal  regions  (e.g.,  precuneus,  posterior  cingulate  cortex, 
parahippocampal  gyrus,…),  and  the  anterior  and  ventral  medial 
prefrontal  cortex.  These  regions,  according  to  e.g.  Andrews‐Hanna 
(2010),  are  related  to  ‘self‐relevant,  affective  decisions’  and  the 
’construction  of  a  mental  scene  based  on  memory’.  Counterfactual 
thinking  shows  greater  activation  (whole  brain  threshold  of  p 
<.001;  corrected  for  multiple  comparison,  p<.05  FDR,  number  of 
voxels ≥ 10), compared to past and future thinking, in the temporo‐
parietal  junction  and  dorsomedial  prefrontal  cortex  (parts  of  the 
mentalizing  system;  regions  activated  by  affective,  self‐referential 
and  social  cognitive  processes),  and  the  anterior  intraparietal 
sulcus  and  premotor  cortex  (parts  of  the  mirror  system).  These 
areas comprise two systems reflecting the understanding of human 
intentional behavior. Hence, activation of these areas in the present 
study  is  consistent  with  the  idea  that  counterfactuals  involve 
imagining what would have happened if the participant or someone 
else  willingly  had  undertaken  remedial  action.  In  addition, 
counterfactual  thinking  also  activates  the  right  temporal  pole  and 
the  orbitofrontal  cortex  stronger,  indicating  the  importance  of  its 
emotional component.  

E20
Contextual
Effects
on
Memory
for
Impressions in Young and Older Adults Brittany 
S.  Cassidy,  Brandeis  University;  and  Angela  H.  Gutchess,  Brandeis 
University‐  Previous  aging  related  memory  research  has  largely 
concentrated  on  items  lacking  socioemotional  context,  and 
evidence  for  age  related  cognitive  decline  pervades  this  body  of 
work.    Although  fMRI  research  has  implicated  hippocampal 
dysfunction  in  preventing  older  adults  from  successful  binding  of 
many  types  of  features,  recent  research  suggests  that  the 
hippocampus might not be critical in forming trait associations, and 
that  there  exists  a  specialized  neural  mechanism  for  social 
information  that  differs  from  well‐established  memory  systems. 
These  findings  allow  for  the  possibility  that  memory  for  social 
information  may  show  less  age  related  decline  than  memory  for 
non‐social  information.  The  current  study  investigated  how  task 
intentionality (explicit or implicit) and presenting information in a 
personally  meaningful  or  irrelevant  way  modulated  memory  for 
impressions  in  young  and  older  adults.    Participants  viewed  faces 
paired  with  trait  inferring  behavioral  sentences,  and  were 
instructed  to  both  form  and  state  their  impression  out  loud 
(explicit)  or  to  read  the  sentence  out  loud  (implicit).    After  each 
face‐behavior  pair,  participants  responded  to  a  prompt  that  was 
either  personally  meaningful  or  not.    Participants  completed  a 
retrieval task where they viewed all previously seen faces with two 
behavioral traits listed below, and chose which trait was associated 
with the face. Both age groups remembered trait associations to the 
same extent.  However, older adults had enhanced memory for trait 
information  presented  in  a  personally  meaningful  relative  to  a 
personally  irrelevant  way,  whereas  young  adults  were  unaffected 
by  this  manipulation.    These  results  provide  evidence  that  older 
adults  retain  the  capacity  to  remember  trait  associations  at  the 
level  of  young  adults,  but  the  context  in  which  this  information  is 
presented  modulates  the  extent  of  successful  recollection.    The 
findings  additionally  suggest  that  the  neural  correlates  of 
impression formation may be relatively spared with age, and that a 
specialized  social  memory  system  might  serve  to  increase 
successful feature binding under conditions where the task at hand 
is personally engaging. 
 

 

 

 

E22
Brain Response Reveals a Cultural Difference
in Spontaneous Trait Inference Jinkyung  Na, 
University of Michigan; and Shinobu Kitayama, University of Michigan‐
Previous  work  suggests  that  lay  people  automatically  infer  an 
observed  behavior  to  be  strongly  expressive  of  the  actor’s 
underlying personality. Importantly, however, this effect is likely to 
be greater in more independently oriented cultures. We showed, for 
the  first  time,  the  corresponding  cross‐cultural  pattern  in  brain 
response.  Seventeen  European  and  sixteen  Asian  Americans  were 
first  asked  to  memorize  60  pairs  of  a  facial  photo  and  a  behavior. 
Each  face  was  paired  with  two  behaviors  that  implied  the  same 
trait.  Subsequently,  the  participants  performed  a  lexical  judgment 
task,  with  their  electroencephalogram  monitored  on  line.  Each  of 
the 30 photos used in the first phase served as a prime and a word 
that was either congruent or incongruent with the trait implied by 
the paired behavior served a target. Of particular interest is an ERP 
component  called  N400,  a  negative  deflection  peaking 
approximately  400  ms  after  stimulus  presentation  that  is  most 
prominently  observed  in  posterior  electrodes.  N400  is  thought  to 
index  the  detection  of  semantic  incongruity.  Thus,  Spontaneous 
trait inference would be demonstrated by a more prominent N400 
for  the  incongruent  traits  relative  to  the  congruent  traits.  Mean 
amplitude  was  computed  in  two  relevant  time  intervals  (350‐450 
ms  and  450‐550  ms)  for  each  participant.  As  predicted,  European 
Americans showed a significantly greater negativity at Cz, Cpz, and 
Pz  both  during  the  350‐450  ms  and  the  450‐550  ms  post  target 
when the target was incongruous with the implied trait than when 
the  two  were  congruous.  No  incongruity‐based  negativity  was 
evident  for  Asian  Americans.  The  cultural  difference  in  the 
incongruity‐based  negativity  was  mediated  by  self‐reported  levels 
of independent social orientation. 

E21
Counterfactual
thinking:
The
interplay
between affect, memory, and social cognition
Nicole Van Hoeck, Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Frank Van Overwalle, Vrije 
Universiteit  Brussel;  Ning  Ma,  Vrije  Universiteit  Brussel;and  Daan 
Bauwens,  Vrije  Universiteit  Brussel‐  Recent  studies  suggest  that  a 
brain network mainly associated with episodic memory and default 
processing  (frontal  and  medial  temporal‐parietal  systems)  has  a 
more general function in imagining oneself in another time, place or 
perspective (e.g., episodic future thought, theory of mind,…). If this 
is  correct,  counterfactual  thinking  (e.g.,  “If  I  had  left  the  office 
earlier, I wouldn’t have missed my train.”) should also activate this 
network.  Until  today  neurological  evidence  on  the  localization  of 

 

E23

[25] 

the  amygdala,  while  subsequently  remembered  top‐down  stimuli 
would  engage  the  medial  prefrontal  cortex.    Sixteen  women  were 
scanned on a 3‐Tesla GE magnet while viewing bottom‐up and top‐
down  emotional  stimuli  (fearful  faces  and  negative  captions  that 
were  presented,  followed  by  a  neutral  face).  Immediately  after 
scanning,  participants  were  given  a  forced‐choice  cued  memory 
test,  in  which  they  were  asked  to  indicate  whether  a  face  or  a 
caption  had  been  presented  before  each  neutral  face.  Memory 
performance  did  not  differ  between  bottom‐up  and  top‐down 
emotion  generation  conditions  (p  =  .34).  An  interaction  contrast 
[(Bottom‐Up Correct – Bottom‐Up Incorrect) – (Top‐Down Correct  
‐  Top‐Down  Incorrect)]  revealed  that  amygdala  activation  at 
encoding  was  associated  with  subsequent  memory  for  bottom‐up 
stimuli  (but  not  top‐down  stimuli).  The  reverse  interaction 
revealed  that  medial  prefrontal  cortex  at  encoding  was  associated 
with subsequent memory for top‐down stimuli (but not bottom‐up 
stimuli).  The  present  results  indicate  that  emotionally‐enhanced 
memory does not always rely upon the same neural regions. Rather, 
the cognitive complexity of the emotional stimuli impacts whether 
subsequent memory is associated with the activation of amygadala 
or prefrontal systems.  

Serotonin Transporter Genotype Predicts
Individual
Differences
in
Extinction
Retention Catherine A. Hartley, New York University; Elizabeth A. 
Phelps, New York University; B. J. Casey, Weill Cornell Medical College; 
and  Charles  Glatt,  Weill  Cornell  Medical  College‐  The  persistence  of 
fear in the absence of any imminent threat is a hallmark of anxiety 
disorders.  During  Pavlovian  fear  conditioning,  a  neutral  stimulus 
acquires emotional significance after being paired with an aversive 
stimulus.  Extinction  refers  to  the  gradual  reduction  in  fear 
expression that occurs when the conditioned stimulus is presented 
repeatedly  with  no  reinforcement.  However,  extinguished  fear 
responses are not erased, as fear may reemerge after a delay. This 
spontaneous recovery of fear following extinction is associated with 
pathological  anxiety.  Thus,  a  better  understanding  of  the 
mechanisms underlying individual variation in extinction retention 
may  help  to  elucidate  the  origins  of  psychological  resilience  and 
vulnerability  in  humans.  A  recent  study  (Wellman  et  al.,  2007) 
reported  elevated  levels  of  spontaneous  recovery  in  serotonin 
transporter  (5‐HTT)  knockout  mice,  suggesting  that  that  5‐HTT 
expression  plays  an  important  role  in  the  retention  of  extinction 
learning.  In  this  study,  we  explore  whether  two  common 
polymorphisms that are thought to influence 5‐HTT expression are 
associated  with  individual  differences  in  extinction  retention.  We 
used  a  two‐day  Pavlovian  fear  conditioning  paradigm,  in  which 
visual  stimuli  were  paired  with  mild  electric  shock.  On  day  one, 
participants  underwent  acquisition  followed  immediately  by  an 
unsignaled initial extinction phase. On day two, a second extinction 
phase  enabled  the  evaluation  of  how  well  participants  retained 
initial extinction learning. Participants provided saliva samples for 
genetic  analysis,  and  completed  questionnaires  assessing  anxiety 
and  depressive  symptoms.  We  found  that  a  polyadenylation 
polymorphism  in  the  serotonin  transporter  (rs3813034)  was 
associated  with  individual  variation  in  extinction  retention. 
Participants  carrying  increasing  numbers  of  the  allele  associated 
with  lower  5‐HTT  expression  exhibited  greater  spontaneous 
recovery.  Furthermore,  this  allele  was  associated  with  increased 
trait  anxiety  and  depressive  symptoms  in  a  dose‐dependent 
manner.  In  contrast,  the  serotonin  transporter‐linked  promoter 
region  polymorphism  (5HTTLPR)  was  not  associated  with 
individual  differences  in  any  of  these  measures.  These  results 
identify  a  behavioral  phenotype  associated  with  the  rs3813034 
polymorphism and suggest that genetically‐mediated differences in 
extinction  retention  may  confer  an  increased  risk  of  developing 
anxiety disorders. 

E25
Amygdala-prefrontal connectivity during
processing
of
surprised
faces
predicts
individual differences in susceptibility to
context-M.  Justin  Kim,  Dartmouth  College;  Randi  H.  Bennett, 
Dartmouth College; Kimberly M. Solomon, Dartmouth College; & Paul J. 
 
Whalen,  Dartmouth  College‐ Surprised  faces  are  ambiguous  since 
they can be interpreted as either positively or negatively valenced.  
The amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex exhibit inverse activity 
patterns in response to surprise that predict these interpretations, 
showing  high  amygdala  –  low  prefrontal  activation  to  negative 
interpretations and the opposite pattern to positive interpretations.  
While  these  data  document  the  importance  of  subjective 
interpretations  of  surprise,  not  all  standardized  photographs  of 
surprised expressions are ambiguous in this way.  The expressions 
of some individual surprise stimulus faces are consistently rated as 
negative  or  positive,  demonstrating  the  concurrent  importance  of 
stimulus  driven  facial  features  on  subjective  ratings  of  surprise.  
Finally, one can  explicitly influence  the  interpretation  of  surprised 
faces  via  contextual  information.    For  example,  Kim  et  al  (2004) 
provided  contextual  sentences  describing  positive  (e.g.,  “He  just 
won  $500”)  or  negative  (e.g.,  “He  just  lost  $500”)  scenarios  that 
influenced the interpretation of and neural responses to presented 
surprised  faces.    Specifically,  amygdala  activity  was  increased  to 
surprised  faces  presented  in  a  negative  context,  while  an  area  of 
rostral  anterior  cingulate  cortex  (rACC)  was  correlated  with  this 
amygdala  activity.    Critically,  rACC  was  the  only  region  active  to 
both  the  face  and  sentence  information  –  suggesting  a  role  in  top‐
down  control  (Kim  et  al.,  2004).    Based  on  these  findings,  we 
reasoned  that  the  degree  to  which  one  is  influenced  by  explicit 
contextual  cues  would  be  associated  with  greater  interaction 
between  the  amygdala and rACC  during  implicit  processing.    Prior 
to  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI),  22  healthy 
subjects were instructed to rate the valence of each surprised face, 
based  on  the  preceding  sentence  that  was  either  positively  or 
negatively  valenced.  Each  surprised  face  was  presented  twice, 
paired  with  contrasting  sentences  that  have  been  matched  for 
arousal  and  content  (e.g.,  “He  just  won  $500”  vs.  “He  just  lost 
$500”).    The  propensity  for  using  contextual  cues  (Contextual 
Susceptibility  Index,  or  CSI  score)  was  calculated  by  subtracting 
valence  ratings  of  faces  associated  with  positive  sentences  from 
those  with  negative  sentences.    The  idea  here  was  that  the  larger 
the CSI score, the more influenced the subject was by the contextual 
cues.    During  a  subsequent  fMRI  session,  each  subject  passively 
viewed  surprised  faces  presented  in  blocks  according  to  their 

E24
Different
Paths
to
Memory:
Neural
Correlates of Memory for Bottom-Up and
1 
Top-Down Emotional Stimuli- Kateri McRae, University 
of  Denver;  Ama  Thrasher,  Stanford  University;  Stephen  Allison, 
University  of  California,  San  Francisco;  Supriya  Misra,  Stanford 
University;  Sean  C.  Pereira,  Stanford  University;  &  James  J.  Gross, 
Stanford  University.  Memory  can  be  enhanced  in  several  ways,  for 
example  by  varying  the  emotional  intensity  or  the  cognitive 
complexity  of  the  stimulus  to  be  remembered.  These  routes  to 
enhanced  memory  are  thought  to  rely  upon  different  neural 
systems. To date, no one has investigated the neural mechanisms of 
enhanced memory for emotional stimuli that vary in terms of their 
cognitive  complexity.  The  present  study  induced  emotion  in  two 
ways:  bottom‐up  and  top‐down.    Bottom‐up  emotion  generation 
involved  the  perception  of  low‐level  features  of  an  emotional 
stimulus  (e.g.,  a  fearful  emotional  face).    Top‐down  emotion 
generation  involved  the  appraisal  of  the  meaning  of  a  stimulus 
considering  the  larger  context  within  which  an  individual  is 
operating  (e.g.,  captions  with  negative  contextual  information 
paired with a neutral face). The present study tested the hypothesis 
that  subsequently  remembered  bottom‐up  stimuli  would  engage 

 

[26] 

stimulus  driven  valence  (i.e.,  negative,  ambiguous,  positive).  
Results  showed  significantly  increased  amygdala  activity  to 
negative  compared  to  positive  surprised  faces.    Next,  functional 
connectivity  of  this  region  of  the  amygdala  during  this  passive 
viewing fMRI session was assessed in conjunction with the previous 
behavioral  CSI  scores.    We  found  a  significant  positive  correlation 
between  CSI  scores  and  functional  connectivity  between  the 
amygdala  and  rACC.    In  other  words,  individuals  who  were  more 
influenced  by  contextual  cues  to  make  valence  judgments  also 
showed tighter coupling of amygdala‐rACC activity when passively 
viewing surprised faces.  Taken together, our results demonstrate a 
range  of  individual  differences  in  the  propensity  to  use  explicit 
contextual  cues  to  determine  the  valence  of  surprised  faces,  and 
this  propensity  is  predicted  by  greater  coupling  between  the 
amygdala  and  prefrontal  cortex  during  implicit  processing  of 
surprise. 

whenever  mental  state  inference  is  required,  whether  actions  are 
visible or not, the mentalizing system is involved. Conversely, MNS 
activity  either  stays  constant  (when  action  is  visible)  or  actually 
decreases (when action is described by text).  This suggests that in 
the  presence  of  visible  actions  the  MNS  may  serve  in  a  social 
perceptual  role,  organizing  information  along  intentional  lines 
before passing the information to the mentalizing system for actual 
MSI.  
E27 
Social norm processing in Social Phobia:
Atypically increased ventromedial frontal
cortex
responsiveness
to
unintentional (embarrassing) transgressions- 
Karina Blair,  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health‐ Generalized social 
phobia  (GSP)  is  defined  by  a  persistent  fear  of  social  disapproval. 
However, the  neural  underpinnings  of  this increased  fear  and  its 
mediating  factors  are unclear.  Using event‐related  fMRI,  we 
examined  whether  the intent of  an  event,  which  mediates the 
neural  response  to  social  disapproval  in healthy  individuals, 
differentially  affects  response  in  GSP.  Specifically,  would  patients 
with GSP show particularly increased response to (embarrassment‐
mediated)  unintentional transgressions? Method:  Sixteen patients 
with  GSP  and sixteen  age,  IQ,  and  gender  matched  healthy 
individuals  read stories  that  either  involved neutral  social  events, 
intentional  (e.g.,  choking  on food  at  party,  and coughing  it  up),  or 
unintentional  transgressions  (e.g.,  disliking  food  at party,  and 
spitting  it  out).  In addition,  following  the scan  subjects  rated  the 
stories  according  to embarrassment  and  inappropriateness.  The 
BOLD response data was analyzed using a 2 (Group: GSP, HC) by 3 
(Transgression:  Intentional,  Unintentional, None)  ANOVA  to 
produce statistical maps of the main effect of group and valence and 
group  by  valence  interaction  (p<0.005; corrected  for  multiple 
comparison). Results:  Significant group‐by‐
transgression interactions  were  observed  within  ventral  regions 
of medial  prefrontal  cortex  (MPFC).  Whereas the  healthy 
individuals  showed  significantly increased  BOLD  responses 
to intentional, relative to unintentional transgressions, the patients 
with 
GSP showed 
significantly 
increased responses 
to 
the unintentional transgressions.  In  addition,  they  rated  the 
unintentional 
transgressions 
as significantly 
more 
embarrassing than  the  comparison  individuals,  although  the two 
groups  did  not  differ  in  their  ratings  of  neutral  social  events.  We 
also  observed  significant group  main effects  within  the  amygdala 
and  bilateral  insula;  patients  with  GSP  showed elevated  responses 
within 
these 
regions 
to 
both intentional 
and 
unintentional transgressions.   Conclusions:  These  results  further 
underscore the importance of MPFC as part of the pathophysiology 
of GSP, and MPFC’s relation to distorted self‐referential processing 
in this disorder.  In addition, the current results further underscore 
the extended  role  of  the  amygdala  and  insula  in  the  processing  of 
social stimuli more generally in GSP. 

E26

Understanding the mental and mechanical
aspects of others: Towards a reconciliation
of mirror neuron and mental state inference
accounts of social cognition- Robert  P.  Spunt, 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  and  Matthew  D.  Lieberman, 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles­  When  we  observe  others,  we 
rarely  understand  their  movements  as  mere  mechanical 
interactions with the physical world. Conceiving the act of writing a 
manuscript  as  “typing  on  a  keyboard”  conceals  the  complicated 
mental  life  (“wanting  to  publish”)  and  social  context  (“avoiding 
perishing”) that imbues with act with meaning. Social neuroscience 
has made considerable progress identifying the neural systems that 
enable people to understand what other people are doing with their 
bodies, but there is debate over the neural systems that support the 
ability to infer the mental states that explain why people are moving 
their  bodies  in  the  first  place.  More  specifically,  two  non‐
overlapping systems have been identified as candidates for carrying 
out  mental  state  inferences  (MSIs)  from  observed  actions:  the 
mirror  neuron  system  (MNS),  which  is  reliably  activated  by  the 
perception  of  bodily  actions  and  which  has  been  shown  to  be 
sensitive  to  features  of  an  action’s  physical  context  that  cue  the 
actor’s  goals  and  intentions;  and  the  “mentalizing”  or  “theory‐of‐
mind” system, which is reliably activated as individuals are induced 
to explicitly make MSIs. Why has neuroimaging revealed two neural 
systems for social cognition? One reason may be that these systems 
have  been  investigated  using  dramatically  different  methods,  with 
MNS researchers using concrete social stimuli such as video clips of 
actions,  and  theory‐of‐mind  researchers  using  relatively  abstract 
social  stimuli  such  as  verbal  vignettes.  In  the  present  studies,  we 
used  an  action  identification  theory  (AIT;  Vallacher  &  Wegner, 
1987)  framework  to  control  encoding  strategies  during  action 
understanding  that  varied  in  the  extent  to  which  they  induced 
mentalizing about the target action. AIT is predicated on the insight 
that  the  same  action  can  be  identified  in  numerous  ways,  with 
higher  levels  identifying  why  an  action  is  performed  and  lower 
levels identifying how an action is performed. In the first study (in 
press,  Journal  of  Cognitive  Neuroscience),  participants  watched 
video  clips  of  human  actions;  for  each  clip,  MSI  demand  was 
manipulated  by  asking  participants  to  identifying  how  the  actor  is 
doing  it  (low  MSI  demand),  what  the  actor  is  doing  (intermediate 
MSI  demand),  and  why  they  are  doing  it  (high  MSI  demand).  MNS 
activity  was  not  modulated  by  level  of  MSI  demand;  however, 
several  regions  of  the  mentalizing  system  were  associated  with 
increasing  MSI  demand.  In  a  second  study  (in  press,  Psychological 
Science)  featuring  verbal  descriptions  of  actions,  identifying  how 
increased engagement of premotor areas believed to be part of the 
human  MNS,  while  identifying  why  once  again  engaged  regions  of 
the  mentalizing  system.  Overall,  these  studies  demonstrate  that 

 

E28 
Motor Priming and the Chameleon EffectJeremy  Hogeveen,  Wilfrid  Laurier  University  In  cognitive 
neuroscience,  motor  resonance  refers  to  the  activation  of  similar 
brain regions during both action execution and action observation.  
Social psychologists have proposed that motor resonance is a viable 
mechanism  underlying  the  chameleon  effect  ‐  the  automatic 
mimicry of an interaction partner’s behaviour (Chartrand & Bargh, 
1999). Previous work in social psychology has shown that priming 
interdependent  self  construal  enhances  the  degree  of  mimicry 
during  an  interaction  (van  Baaren  et  al.,  2003).  Here,  we  asked 
whether  priming  interdependent  self‐construal  also  increases  the 
degree  of  motor  priming  in  an  action  observation  task,  similar  to 

[27] 

those reported in the cognitive neuroscience literature. Participants 
held  a  rubber  ball  under  an  occluder  and  made  hard  or  soft 
squeezes  in  response  to  colour  cues  super‐imposed  on  videos 
depicting hard or soft squeezes of an identical rubber ball. Although 
the cue‐response mapping was between the colour of the text and 
hard  or  soft  squeezes,  the  type  of  word  also  acted  as  an 
interdependent  self‐construal  (i.e.  together,  integrate)  or  an 
independent  self  construal  (i.e.  alone,  mine)  prime.  When  the 
observed squeeze was incongruent with the cued squeeze, response 
time  was  slowed  and  EMG  activity  in  the  abductor  pollicis  brevis 
was  influenced  in  the  direction  of  the  incongruence  between  the 
video  and  the  instructional  cue.  Importantly,  this  effect  was 
significantly  greater  when  the  word  type  was  an  interdependent 
self  construal  prime.  The  fact  that  this  self‐construal  manipulation 
which is known to modulate the chameleon effect also affects basic 
action  priming  lends  support  to  the  idea  that  the  two  behavioural 
phenomena  may  be  mediated  by  the  same  motor  resonant 
mechanisms. 

completed an affective startle paradigm and responded to the Beck 
Depression  Inventory  (BDI).  Individuals  with  BDI  scores  greater 
than  or  equal  to  15  were  classified  as  dysphoric  (N=24)  while 
individuals  scoring  less  than  or  equal  to  9  were  classified  as  non‐
dysphoric  (N=187).  Emotion‐modulation  of  the  startle  blink 
response  was  measured  during  and  after  the  presentation  of 
affective pictures. Forty‐two pictures of three valences (unpleasant, 
pleasant,  and  neutral)  were  presented  to  each  subject  while  EMG 
was recorded. The acoustic startle probe was a 50 ms 100 dB burst 
of  white  noise  presented  binaurally.  Probes  were  presented  for 
each condition at one of the following four probe times: 1.5, 4.5, 7, 
or  9  seconds  post‐stimulus  onset.    Blink  magnitude  was  z‐
transformed  within‐subject  due  to  large  individual  differences  in 
blink magnitude. Data was analyzed using binary logistic regression 
with dysphoria group serving as the dependent variable and mean 
blink  magnitude  for  each  picture  valence  serving  as  predictors  for 
each time point. This analysis indicated that decreased mean blink 
magnitude  for  positive  pictures  significantly  predicted  dysphoric 
group  membership  at  1.5  s  post‐stimulus  onset  (B  =  ‐1.963,  SE  = 
0.834, p = 0.019, exp(B) = 0.140) while increased blink magnitude 
for  negative  pictures  significantly  predicted  dysphoric  group 
membership  9  s  post‐stimulus  onset  (B  =  1.428,  SE  =  0.677,  p  = 
0.035, exp(B) = 4.171). There were no group differences at the 4.5 s 
or  7  s  probe  times  (all  p  >  0.05).        This  data  has  implications  for 
how  we  conceptualize  emotional  information  processing  in 
depression.    It  suggests  that  individuals  with  high  levels  of 
depression  are  more  reactive  to  pleasant  information  more 
immediately  after  receiving  it,  and  they  continue  to  exhibit 
heightened  reactivity  to  unpleasant  information  longer  than 
individuals  with  low  levels  of  depression.    Greater  startle 
magnitude  has  been  found  for  negative  affective  stimuli  in 
individuals with heightened levels of depression in previous studies 
(Cook,  Hawk,  Davis,  &  Stevenson,  1991;  Larson,  Nitschke,  & 
Davidson, 2007), but attenuated responses to unpleasant stimuli in 
depressed  individuals  have  not  been  reported  in  the  literature.  
While  our  findings  for  the  9  s  probe  time  are  consistent  with 
previous  literature  on  both  startle  magnitude  and  patterns  of 
sustained negative affect in general for depression, our findings at 
the 1.5 s probe time are unexpected.  However, prior studies have 
not broken down the time course of startle magnitude as this study 
has, so these findings represent an advance of prior literature.  
 
E31

E29
Dynamic Cultural Influences on Amygdala
Response to Emotional Scenes Lisa  Hechtman,  North 
Western  University;  Ahmad  Hariri,  Duke  University;  Tokiko  Harada, 
Nagoya  University;  Yoko  Mano,  Tohuko  University;  Norihiro  Sadato, 
National  Institute  for  Physiological  Sciences;  Todd  B.  Parrish, 
Northwestern  University;  Tetsuya  Iidaka,  Nagoya  University;  and 
Joan  Y.  Chiao,  Northwestern  University‐  In Western populations,
carriers of the short (S) allele of the serotonin transporter gene show
heightened amygdala response to emotional stimuli, as well as
increased risk for anxiety and depression. In East Asian populations, by
contrast, prevalence rates of anxiety and depression are surprisingly
low, given that Asians are almost twice as likely to carry the S allele
(Chiao & Blizinsky, 2010). One theory holds that emotional vigilance
is adaptive in collectivistic nations, such as in East Asia, where
emphasis on group membership and hierarchical distinctions among
members creates a need for sensitivity to social surroundings. Here we
examine the neural mechanisms by which culture, in addition to genetic
factors, influences sensitivity to emotional stimuli. Bicultural Asian
Americans completed an individualistic or collectivistic essay prime,
and subsequently matched a series of emotional scenes and geometric
shapes during fMRI scanning. ROI analysis within bilateral amygdala
revealed that participants’ degree of primed individualism negatively
predicts signal change in left amygdala to emotional scenes. Behavioral
results furthermore indicate that collectivistic priming increased task
accuracy without an RT tradeoff. Taken together, these findings
demonstrate that even temporarily heightening awareness of
collectivistic cultural values enhances emotional vigilance, likely due to
culture-gene coevolution of individualism-collectivism and the
serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR). 

Social identity modulates automatic face
perception: Group membership overrides the
effects of race on early event-related
potentials‐ Jay J. Van Bavel, New York University; and William A. 
Cunningham,  The  Ohio  State  University­  Humans  are  remarkably 
sensitive  to  changes  in  the  social  context,  especially  the 
relationships that bind them to some people and align them against 
others.  At  the  flip  of  a  coin,  people  divide  the  social  world  into  us 
and  them,  using  seemingly  trivial  social  categories  to  coordinate 
evaluation  and  behavior.  Dozens  of  studies  have  documented  this 
bias  in  facial  recognition,  finding  superior recognition  memory  for 
own‐race  faces  compared  to  other‐race  faces.  More  recently, 
several  studies  have  used  electroencephalography  (EEG)  to  help 
identify  exactly  how  quickly  social  categories  like  race  alter 
perceptual  processing.  These  studies  have  provided  evidence  that 
people  differentially  process  Black  and  White  faces  within  a  few 
hundred  milliseconds  of  stimulus  presentation  and  these  racial 
biases  persist  when  participants  are  attending  to  another 
dimension  of  social  categorization  or  attempt  to  individuate  the 
faces.  These  results  have  led  researchers  to  conclude  that  racial 
biases in early perceptual processing are automatic and cannot be 
inhibited.  However,  recent  research  has  shown  that  assigning 
people to mixed‐race minimal groups can eliminate racial biases in 
perception and evaluation by leading people to categorize others on 

E30
Elaborating the Time Course of the EmotionModulated Startle Reflex in Dysphoria- Lauren 
E. Taubitz, University of Wisconsin – Milwaukee; Jordan S. Robinson, 
University  of  Wisconsin  –  Milwaukee;  and  Christine  L.  Larson, 
University  of  Wisconsin  –  Milwaukee  Recent  work  indicates  that 
individuals  with  depression  show  longer‐lasting  responses  to 
negatively‐valent  stimuli  than  individuals  without  depression 
(Caseras,  Garner,  Bradley,  &  Mogg,  2007;  Larson,  Nitschke,  & 
Davidson,  2007).  The  startle  reflex  provides  a  measure  for 
characterizing  differences  in  emotion  regulation  between 
individuals  with  and  without  affective  disorders.  The  purpose  of 
this  study  was  to  better  understand  the  time  course  of  the  startle 
reflex in individuals high and low on a measure of depression while 
they  process  positive,  negative,  and  neutral  pictorial  stimuli.    As 
part  of  a  larger  psychophysiological  study,  208  undergraduates 

 

[28] 

the basis of their minimal group membership rather than their race. 
We therefore predicted that group membership might override the 
effects  of  race  on  early  event‐related  potentials  if  participants 
categorized  Black  and  White  targets  as  in‐group  members.We 
randomly  assigned  participants  to  one  of  two  mixed‐race  minimal 
groups  and  had  them  visually  identify  Black  and  White  in‐group 
and  out‐group  members  during  EEG.  As  predicted,  participants 
assigned  to  a  mixed‐race  group  had  own‐group  bias  on  a  positive 
event‐related  potential  occurring  approximately  100  milliseconds 
following  stimulus  presentation  (P100).  The  P100  was  greater 
following in‐group than out‐group faces, regardless of race. This in‐
group  bias  was  evident  despite  the  fact  that  the  intergroup 
distinction  was  random,  there  were  no  visual  cues  to  distinguish 
group  membership,  and  exposure  to  the  faces  was  equivalent, 
recent  and  relatively  brief.  The  current  study  suggests  that  very 
early effects of race are not inevitable, but are sensitive to current 
motivational  states  and  perceptual  goals.  While  social  categories 
clearly affect the earliest phases of social perception, the particular 
social  categorization  is  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  social  context  – 
top‐down  influences  like  social  identity  can  influence  automatic 
face perception in a dynamic fashion. 

hedonic‐now items on average, but with highly similar numbers of 
items  and  SCR  responses  to  the  other  categories  (functional‐now 
and all future‐oriented). 
E33
Investigating conformity in EEG­  Sina  Alexa 
Trautmann‐Lengsfeld,  Carl  von  Ossietzky  University  Oldenburg;  and 
Christoph  Herrmann,  Carl  von  Ossietzky  University  Oldenburg‐ 
Solomon  Asch  (1951)  demonstrated  that  group  pressure  has 
tremendous  influence  on  individual’s  judgement  of  a  perceptually 
simple task. Subjects conformed to the group’s incorrect judgement 
in  33%  of  the  time  although  the  group  was  obviously  wrong.  The 
latter  so‐called  Asch‐effect  has  been  shown  to  be  enhanced  by 
different  factors,  e.g.,  high  task  difficulty,  uncertainty,  and  strong 
group  cohesion.  The  question  is:  do  participants  conform  because 
they  decide  to  do  so  or  because  their  perception  is  altered  by  the 
opinion of the group? In a recent fMRI study, Berns and colleagues 
(2005)  applied  a  difficult  mental  rotation  task  embedded  in  an 
adapted  Asch‐paradigm.  Enhanced  occipito‐parietal  activation 
during  conformity  was  interpreted  as  altered  perception  rather 
than  active  decision  processes.  However,  early  visual  cortex  could 
be  modulated  by  later  processing  stages  in  a  reentrant  way.  Up  to 
now,  there  has  been  no  study  investigating  the  neuronal  time 
course  of  conformity.  In  the  present  study,  our  goal  was  (1)  to 
develop difficult stimuli for a visual discrimination task, and (2) to 
replicate  the  Asch‐effect  with  these  stimuli.First,  we  developed 
stimuli  consisting  of  squares  including  randomly  distributed  black 
dots  which  were  presented  left  and  right  of  a  fixation  point. 
Subjects  were  instructed  to  press  a  button  on  the  side  where  the 
stimulus  with  the  larger  amount  of  black  dots  appeared.  We 
determined  the  individual  visual  discrimination  threshold  for  ten 
subjects  (23.2±1.7ys,  5  females).  On  the  following  day,  we 
presented the stimuli close to this individual threshold and stimuli 
that were easier to distinguish while simultaneously recording 64‐
channel  EEG.  Results  showed  that  stimuli  close  to  the  threshold 
showed  the  same  ERP‐components  (e.g.,  P1,  N1,  P2,  and  P3  over 
posterior regions) but with a smaller amplitude than easier stimuli. 
Hence,  we  validated  the  stimuli  for  replicating  the  Asch‐
effect.Second,  on  day  one,  ten  women  (21.6±1.8ys)  were  asked  to 
accomplish  the  visual  discrimination  task  and  a  personality 
questionnaire. We pretended to analyze the data in order to be able 
to  find  a  group  of  four  other  people  for  them  who  were  matched 
according  to  their  accuracy  in  the  visual  task  and  to  their 
personality  to  enhance  group  cohesion.  On  day  two,  participants 
accomplished an adapted Asch‐paradigm. Prior to the presentation 
of  a  trial  of  the  visual  discrimination  task  ‐  including  only  stimuli 
close  to  the  individual  visual  threshold  to  enhance  uncertainty 
during the task ‐ faces on the left or right represented the decision 
of  the  fake  group  which  could  either  be  correct  or  incorrect  with 
respect  to  the  actual  stimuli.  Although  subjects  reported  that  they 
thought  the  decision  of  their  group  was  sometimes  incorrect  and 
that  they  often  decided  against  the  group,  they  conformed  to  the 
erroneous group decision in 49.9% which is about 17% more often 
than in the original Asch experiment. In conclusion, we designed an 
experimental  paradigm  suited  to  replicate  the  Asch‐effect  in  a 
modern  EEG  lab  without  the  necessity  to  record  multiple 
participants  simultaneously  and  achieved  an  even  larger  effect  of 
conformity than in the original Asch experiment.  

E32
I want it now: The effects of emotion and time
horizon on the quantity and quality of
consumption decisions Brian  D.  Vickers,  University  of 
Michigan;  and  Stephanie  D.  Preston,  University  of  Michigan‐  The 
effects  of  emotion  on  decision  making  have  been  extensively 
studied for risk taking and recently consumer choice. In particular, 
anxiety  causes  risk  aversion  as  well  as  a  preference  for  functional 
items while sadness causes risk seeking as well as a preference for 
hedonic  items  (e.g.,  Raghunathan,  Pham,  &  Corfman,  2007). 
Similarly, sadness contributes to compulsive shopping (particularly 
for new, rewarding goods) while anxiety contributes to compulsive 
hoarding  (particularly  of  items  that  could  be  useful  later).  Implicit 
in  these  findings,  but  heretofore  untested,  is  that  sadness  and 
anxiety  entail  different  time  horizons  and  affect  the  quality  and 
quantity of items acquired. We hypothesized that sadness‐reducing 
decisions  are  devoted  to  repairing  the  current  self  by  increasing 
overall  acquisition  of  rewarding  items,  but  only  for  the  present 
while  anxiety‐reducing  decisions  are  aimed  at  preparing  for  a 
future ambiguous threat, which increases acquisition of particularly 
functional  goods,  persisting  into  the  future.  Subjects  were  induced 
to  feel  incidental  sadness,  anxiety,  or  a  control  state  (as  in 
Ranhunathan  et  al.,  2007)  before  choosing  as  many  items  as  they 
wanted,  from  a  wide  variety  of  functional  and  hedonic  goods, 
framed  as  being  delivered  immediately  or  8  weeks  into  the  future 
(in  a  blocked  version  the  Object  Decision  Task  (ODT;  Preston, 
Muroff,  &  Wengrovitz,  2009).  Affect  was  measured  by  self  report 
(PANAS;  Watson,  Clark,  &  Tellegen,  1988)  before  and  after  the 
induction  and  skin  conductance  (SCR)  measured  throughout  the 
ODT.  Analysis  employed  a  2x2  repeated‐measures  ANOVA  for 
object  type  and  time  horizon  with  induction  group  as  a  between‐
subjects  factor  followed  by  confirmatory  post‐hoc  tests.  The 
induction  caused  sad  subjects  to  feel  more  negative  overall, 
specifically  more  irritable  and  less  joyful  and  pleased  than  control 
or anxious subjects. Anxious subjects felt more active and troubled 
compared  to  control  subjects,  and  more  excited  than  sad  subjects. 
Sad  subjects  also  responded  slower  on  the  task,  supporting  a 
generalized  reduction  in  behavioral  activation.  Overall,  responses 
were  unique  to  hedonic  items  acquired  for  now.  All  subjects  took 
more hedonic‐now items, and tended to respond faster and have a 
stronger  SCR  response  to  them  than  to  the  functional‐now  or 
hedonic‐  or  functional‐future  items.  These  effects  interacted  with 
emotion  because  the  hedonic‐now  preference  was  particularly 
prominent  in  control  subjects,  present  but  less  pronounced  in  the 
sad subjects, and absent in the anxious subjects, who did pick more 

 

E34 

Nucleus accumbens and prefrontal activity
are recruited when men view sexually
attractive faces- Kristina L. Caudle, Dartmouth College; Todd 
F.  Heatherton,  Dartmouth  College;  and  William  M.  Kelley,  Dartmouth 
College­It  has  been  previously  demonstrated  that  attractive 

[29] 

members of the opposite sex recruit domain‐independent midbrain 
dopaminergic  reward  circuitry.  Of  particular  interest  is  how 
contextual or goal‐related information might modulate the activity 
of  this  midbrain  reward  circuitry,  including  frontal  regions  that 
receive efferent dopaminergic fibers from the midbrain, such as the 
ventral  medial  prefrontal  cortex.  To  examine  this  contextual 
modulation of reward activity, 33 undergraduates (13 men) viewed 
and  rated  pictures  of  the  opposite  sex  on  two  scales:  an  aesthetic 
attractiveness dimension (i.e., How attractive is this person), and a 
separate  sexual  desirability  scale  (i.e.,  How  likely  is  it  that  you 
would have a sexual encounter with this person?). Each participant 
rated each photograph twice, once on each scale. Stimuli were then 
sorted  based  on  each  subjects  individual  ratings,  and  these  were 
used as subject‐specific regressors. Beta weights were extracted for 
spherical  regions  of  interest  in  a  priori  defined  regions  of  the 
nucleus  accumbens  (NAcc),  and  the  ventral  and  dorsal  medial 
prefrontal  cortex  (vmPFC,  dmPFC),  and  offline  statistical  analyses 
were conducted. Global contextual differences in reward processing 
were  addressed  by  examining  differences  in  the  task‐dependent 
neural  activity  evoked  while  making  sexual  desirability  versus 
aesthetic  attractiveness  judgments.  The  vmPFC  and  right  NAcc 
were  more  active  while  making  sexual  desirability  ratings  than 
while  making  aesthetic  attractiveness  ratings.  No  regions  were 
more  active  for  aesthetic  attractiveness  judgments  than  sexual 
desirability judgments. Next, to examine context‐driven differences 
in  processing  face  stimuli,  differences  in  brain  activity  for 
individuals  rated  as  the  most  aesthetically  attractive  and  the  most 
sexually  desirable  were  compared.  Here  we  found  that  the  NAcc 
(bilateral)  increased  linearly  with  both  rated  attractiveness  and 
sexual desirability. In contrast, the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex 
(dMPFC)  increased  with  increasing  ratings  only  for  sexual 
desirability  and  not  for  aesthetic  attractiveness.  These  results 
suggest  dorsal  and  ventral  areas  of  the  prefrontal  cortex  may 
differentially  work  to  modulate  goal‐related  differences  for 
rewarding stimuli, providing contextual information to supplement 
the  obligatory  and  perhaps  less  flexible  activation  of  the  NAcc  to 
rewarding stimuli. 
 

correct  choice.  Hence,  parametric  regressors  for  reaction  time 
under  the  "Associated"  instruction  revealed  regions  that  were 
sensitive  to  controlled  retrieval.  For  assessing  neural  regions 
involved  in  selection,  an  instruction  corresponding  to  a  specific 
dimension  was  shown  (e.g.  "Authority",  "Intelligence", 
"Healthiness",  "Gender",  etc.).  For  some  trials,  selecting  along  the 
given  dimension  required  greater  specificity  (i.e.  selecting  for  the 
relevant  dimension  and  against  irrelevant  dimensions),  thereby 
increasing  selection  demands  to  make  the  correct  choice.  Hence 
parametric regressors for reaction time under a specific dimension 
instruction  revealed  regions  that  were  sensitive  to  selection. 
Parametric regressors were then directly compared with each other 
to  uncover  neural  regions  that  were  particularly  sensitive  to 
controlled  retrieval  or  selection.  This  comparison  cancels  out 
activity  that  is  commonly  related  to  difficulty.  Neural  regions  that 
showed  greater  activity  to  controlled  retrieval  than  to  selection 
included  subgenual  cingulate  cortex  (~BA  25),  middle  temporal 
cortex,  temporal  pole,  and  anterior  frontal  operculum.  Neural 
regions that showed greater activity to selection than to controlled 
retrieval included the anterior VMPFC (~BA 10/32) and mid‐VLPFC 
(~BA 45). 
 
E36
Examining the Role of Executive Functioning
in Implicit Association Test Performance‐ Lesa K. 
Ellis, Westminster College; and Raquel Gabbitas, Westminster College, 
University  of  Minnesota‐  Racism  is  clearly  a  problem  in  the  United 
States, but racist attitudes are often difficult to measure.  A variety 
of  psychological  measurements  have  sought  to  empirically  assess 
the  central  issues  of  racism,  such  as  stereotypical  behavior  and 
negative  implicit  feelings.  Such  measurements  have  shown  that 
many  individuals  display  unconscious  bias  towards  perceived 
outgroups  or  minorities.    This  lack  of  awareness  may  influence 
individuals’  decisions  with  both  simple  cognitive  tasks,  as  well  as 
critical  social  decisions.    An  individual’s  ability  to  engage  or 
disengage  from  such  potentially  harmful  implicit  feelings  may  be 
dependent  on  his/her  executive  functioning  ability;  therefore,  it  is 
important  to  understand  the  role  of  executive  functioning  in 
implicit  bias  and  how  this  may  influence  external  actions.  
Executive functioning refers to a person’s ability to resolve conflict 
among  several  potential  actions.    Individuals  that  exhibit  poor 
executive  functioning  may  have  difficulty  controlling  negative 
unconscious or implicit feelings which can result in harmful actions.  
The  current  study  examined  the  possible  relationship  between 
performance  on  an  implicit  measure  of  bias  and  a  measure  of 
executive attention.  Forty nine undergraduate students completed 
a version of the Implicit Association Test  (IAT), in which they were 
asked  to  pair  pleasant  and  unpleasant  words  with  both  European 
American and Latina/o American last names.  The IAT uses reaction 
time  differences  during  the  pairing  exercises  as  a  measure  of 
implicit  bias.    Relatively  longer  reaction  times  when  attempting  to 
pair pleasant words with Latina/o American last names vs pairing 
pleasant words with European American last names would indicate 
a level of implicit bias favoring the pairing of pleasant stimuli with 
European  American  names.    Completing  the  IAT  presumably 
requires  executive  functioning  ability.    A  participant  must  pay 
attention  to  the  presented  stimuli,  and  make  decisions  about 
conflicting  information.    To  measure  Executive  Attention, 
participants  completed  the  Attention  Network  Task  (ANT).    While 
the  ANT  also  provides  measures  of  attentional  orienting  and 
alerting,  we  were  interested  in  analyzing  reaction  times  during 
conflict  resolution,  which  requires  the  participant  to  determine 
which direction a center arrow is pointing amidst either congruent 
or  incongruent  arrows.  While  we  hypothesized  that  individuals 
with  relatively  better  scores  on  the  ANT  would  show  relatively 

E35
Neural regions involved in the controlled
retrieval
and
selection
of
social
information. Ajay B. Satpute, Columbia University; David Badre, 
Columbia  University;  and  Kevin  N.  Ochsner,  Columbia  University‐ 
Several  studies  have  suggested  that  distinct  neural  systems 
underlie  the  processing  of  social  information.  However,  precisely 
what these regions are doing is still unknown. Drawing on research 
in semantic memory, we investigated the neural regions involved in 
the  controlled  retrieval  and  selection  of  social  information. 
Controlled  retrieval  is  the  process  of  bringing  more  mnemonic 
information to mind than might be spontaneously provided from a 
stimulus.  Selection  is  the  process  of  picking  out  specific  bits  of 
information  from  what's  been  retrieved  based  on  the  goals  of  the 
perceiver.  To  examine  the  neural  correlates  underlying  these 
processes for social information, we modified a task used in studies 
of  semantic  memory  to  involve  the  names  of  famous  people  and 
characters.  Individuals  (n  =  20)  were  presented  with  triads 
consisting of a cue (e.g. "Darth Vader") and two targets (e.g. "Luke 
Skywalker"  and  "Joseph  Stalin")  on  the  screen.  They  were 
instructed  to  match  the  cue  with  one  of  the  two  targets.  Prior  to 
each  triad,  an  instruction  was  shown  that  indicated  the  basis  on 
which to match the cue with one of the targets. For assessing neural 
regions  involved  in  controlled  retrieval,  the  instruction 
"Associated"  was  shown,  which  indicated  that  they  should  match 
the  cue  to  the  target  that  would  come  to  mind  more  readily  in 
general. For some trials, the cue‐target association was weaker than 
for  others,  thereby  increasing  retrieval  demands  to  indicate  the 

 

[30] 

lower  levels  of  implicit  bias  on  the  IAT,  Pearson’s  correlation 
revealed  virtually  no  relationship    between  the  two  measures (r=‐
.066).    This  finding  suggests  that  the  implicit  bias  revealed  by  the 
IAT  influences  actions  (pairing  of  words  and  names)  outside  of 
regulation  imposed  by  executive  control.    It  would  be  useful  in 
future  studies  to  examine,  within  participants,  neural  networks 
involved  in  each  task  to  better  understand  the  apparent 
dissociation between the two. 

choking  under  pressure  is  caused  by  a  disruption  of  the  ability  to 
devote sufficient WM resources to the task at hand.   
E38
Of Crossroads, Junctions, and Pathways: ToM,
TPJ, and Autism-Rajesh  K.  Kana,  University  of  Alabama  at 
Birmingham;  Lauren  L.  Libero,  University  of  Alabama  at  Birmingham; 
and  Hrishikesh  Deshpande,  University  of  Alabama  at  Birmingham‐  As 
social beings, humans constantly engage in attributing intentions to 
one’s own and others’ actions. Attribution of intentions to others is 
a  key  element  theory‐of‐mind  (ToM).  Although  children  learn 
causal attribution early in development, individuals with autism are 
known  to  have  impairments  in  the  development  of  intentional 
causality  (Baron‐Cohen,  1995).  The  main  study  reported  here 
investigated  the  dichotomy  in  physical  and  intentional  causal 
attribution and its neural correlates in autism. In addition, we did a 
meta‐analysis  of  fourteen  fMRI  studies  of  ToM,  morality,  and 
attentional reorienting to locate a common focal point of activation, 
the  temporoparietal  junction  (TPJ),  and  further  relate  it  to  the 
current  study  in  autism  in  terms  of  location,  and  connections.  
Sixteen  high‐functioning  adolescents  with  autism  and  sixteen  age‐
and‐IQ‐matched  neurotypical  controls  participated  in  this  fMRI 
study.  Non‐verbal  comic  strip  vignettes  involving  physical  and 
intentional  causal  scenarios  (adapted  from  Brunet  et  al.,  2000) 
were  presented  randomly  in  an  event‐related  design,  and  the 
participants had to choose the most logical ending to each vignette 
(from alternatives A, B or C with a button press). The data acquired 
from  the  Siemens  3T  Allegra  head‐only  scanner  housed  at 
University  of  Alabama,  Birmingham  were  analyzed  using  SPM2. 
Besides  the  activation  analysis,  we  computed  the  functional 
connectivity  (separately  for  each  participant)  by  correlating  the 
average  time  course  of  the  signal  extracted  from  all  the  activated 
voxels in functional ROIs defined on group data. The data obtained 
from  individual  ROIs  were  grouped  based  on  lobes  to  further 
examine  network  connectivity. The  main  results  were:  1)  The 
autism  group  showed  reduced  activation,  relative  to  controls,  in 
right  posterior  superior  temporal  sulcus  at  TPJ,  and  increased 
activation  in  bilateral  inferior  parietal  lobule  while  attributing 
intentional causality (p < 0.005); 2) Based on the meta‐analysis, the 
closest  match  to  our  RTPJ  activation  (x=56,  y=‐54,  z=16)  was  the 
Young  and  Saxe  (2009)  study  (x=54,  y=‐52,  z=16)  which 
investigated  spontaneous  mental  state  inference  for  moral 
judgments;  3)  Participants  with  autism  showed  weaker  long 
distance  connectivity,  in  frontal‐temporal  [t  (30)=2.11,  p=  0.04], 
and  frontal‐occipital  [t(30)=2.46,  p=0.02]  networks,  relative  to 
controls  during  intentional  causal  attribution;  4)  Participants  with 
autism  showed  stronger  short‐distance  connectivity,  between  the 
ToM  and  Attentional  reorienting  coordinates  (from  the  studies 
reviewed)  of  the  TPJ  [t  (30)=2.30,  p=  0.03],  relative  to  controls  in 
intentional  causal  attribution;  and  5)  There  was  no  statistically 
significant  behavioral  difference  (reaction  time  and  performance 
accuracy)  between  the  two  groups.    The  findings  suggest  possible 
compensatory neural routes in people with autism in accomplishing 
intentional  causal  attribution.  The  finding  of  long‐distance 
underconnectivity  adds  to  the  converging  evidence  for  cortical 
underconnectivity  in  autism  (Just  et  al.,  2004;  Kana  et  al.,  2006). 
While  TPJ  may  form  the  locus  of  ToM  in  the  brain,  its  precise 
location  in  different  tasks  as  well  as  its  functional  and  anatomical 
connections needs to be explored further.

E37
Choking Under Pressure in Mathematical
Problem Solving: Neural Regions Sensitive to
Working Memory Demand Predict High-Stakes
Performance- Andrew Mattarella‐Micke, University of Chicago; 
Jay Todd, University of Chicago; and Sian Beilock, University of Chicago‐ 
In  a  high‐stakes  situation  like  a  standardized  math  test,  there  are 
strong  incentives  for  high‐level  performance.    Even  though 
individuals are motivated to succeed, overwhelming incentives can 
have the opposite effect – causing performance to drop below levels 
seen  in  low‐stakes  situations.    This  phenomenon  is  referred  to  as 
choking  under  pressure  (Baumeister,  1984).    Distraction  theories 
(Beilock, Kulp, Holt, & Carr, 2004; Eysenck & Calvo, 1992) propose 
that choking is caused by an online disruption of working memory 
(WM),  the  limited‐capacity  system  responsible  for  the  active 
maintenance and manipulation of task content.  There is substantial 
behavioral evidence to support this claim. WM demanding tasks are 
vulnerable  to  a  high  stakes  situation,  while  less  demanding  tasks 
are  spared  (DeCaro,  Wieth,  &  Beilock,  2007).    Further,  individual 
differences  in  WM  capacity  are  correlated  with  individuals’ 
likelihood  of  choking  (Beilock  &  Carr,  2005).    Despite  this 
behavioral  evidence,  neural  support  for  distraction  theories  is 
sparse.  In  the  current  study,  we  used  fMRI  to  explore  the  neural 
correlates of performance under pressure.  Participants completed 
math problems before (low‐pressure) and after (high‐pressure) the 
introduction  of  a  high‐stakes  incentive.    Math  problems  varied  in 
the  demands  they  placed  on  WM,  based  on  previous  research 
demonstrating that problem features such as large operands and a 
borrow operation place the greatest demands on WM (DeStefano & 
LeFevre,  2004).    A  2  (pressure:  low,  high)  x  2  WM  (demand:  high, 
low)  ANOVA  on  math  problem  solving  accuracy  revealed  a  main 
effect  of  demand  [F(1,11)=56.06,  p=.00001]  and  a  main  effect  of 
pressure [F(1,11)=6.19, p<.05].  The demand x pressure interaction 
was  also  significant  [F(1,11)=11.23,  p=.006].    High  WM  demand 
problem performance significantly dropped from the low‐pressure 
(M=0.71,  SE=.02)  to  high‐pressure  (M=0.61,  SE=03)    situation 
[t(12)=3.78,  p=.003].  Low  WM  demand  problem  accuracy  was  not 
affected  by  pressure  (Low‐pressure:  M=0.87,  SE=.03;  High‐
pressure: M=0.89, SE=.02)  [t(12)=0.67, p=.52, ns]. To test the claim 
that  pressure  alters  performance  via  its  effects  on  WM,  low  and 
high  demand  problems  were  first  contrasted  to  localize  regions 
sensitive  to  WM‐related  differences  in  the  arithmetic  problems.  
This  contrast  yielded  regions  common  to  the  working  memory 
network,  including  the  lateral  prefrontal  cortex  and  the 
intraparietal  sulcus  (IPS).    For  each  region  identified  in  this 
contrast,  we  then  regressed  high  WM  demanding  performance 
under  the  high‐pressure  condition  on  average  regional  activity 
under  pressure,  controlling  for  low‐pressure  performance.  This 
regression  allowed  us  to  determine  whether  activation  in  neural 
regions  sensitive  to  WM‐related  differences  in  the  arithmetic 
problems  could  account  for  the  degree  of  choking  (i.e.,  worse 
performance  on  the  high  demand  problems  under  high  as 
compared  to  low  pressure  conditions)  across  individuals.    Two 
regions  showed  a  negative  relation  between  choking  and  BOLD 
response  for  the  high‐pressure  trials:  the  inferior  frontal  junction, 
in the posterior lateral prefrontal cortex, and the IPS. The more an 
individual choked under pressure, the less activity they showed in 
these  regions.    This  result  is  highly  consistent  with  the  claim  that 

 

E39
Self-reports of tendencies to use reappraisal
predict prefrontal asymmetry during an
emotion regulation task- Elizabeth  A.  Bendycki, 
University  of  Virginia,  Indiana  University;  Amanda  R.W.  Steiner, 
University  of  Virginia;  and  James  A.  Coan,  University  of  Virginia‐

[31] 

Maryland,  College  Park;  and  Nathan  Fox,  University  of  Maryland, 
College  Park‐  Social  rejection  is  an  inevitable  and  distressing 
experience  for  everyone  at  some  point  in  life.  For  adolescents  in 
particular,  social  rejection  is  a  common  occurrence,  with  less  than 
half  of  friendships  surviving  over  a  year  (Connolly,  Furman,  & 
Konarski,  2000).    Individuals  vary,  however,  in  their  fear  of 
encountering  social  rejection.  Those  who  are  high  in  rejection 
sensitivity  (Downey  &  Feldman,  1996)  are  thought  to  “anxiously 
expect,  readily  perceive,  and  overreact  to  rejection”  (p.  1327).  
Numerous  studies  have  identified  connections  between  rejection 
sensitivity and problems in romantic and peer relationships.  Less is 
known,  however,  about  the  claim  that  rejection‐sensitive 
individuals demonstrate a heightened attention to rejection in their 
environment (Downey et al., 2004).  Moreover, to date, no study has 
examined underlying neurological evidence of heightened attention 
to  rejection  using  event‐related  potential  (ERP)  methodology, 
despite numerous calls to do so (e.g., Kross et al., 2007).  Thus, the 
objective  of  the  current  study  was  to  examine  whether  individual 
differences in attention exist during the processing of social stimuli 
(i.e.,  images  of  faces).    Participants  in  this  study  included  22  late‐
adolescent females (mean age = 19 years)  recruited based on their 
scores  on  the  Rejection  Sensitivity  Questionnaire  (RSQ;  Downey  & 
Feldman,  1996),  a  36‐item  questionnaire  measuring  expectations 
and  fears  of  social  rejection.    Participants  were  divided  into  two 
groups: average (M = 8.36; N = 12) and high sensitivity (M = 13.59; 
N = 10). Participants completed a standard dot‐probe task in which 
pairs  of  faces  were  presented  briefly  on  a  computer  screen, 
followed  by  a  probe  (arrow),  located  behind  one  of  the  faces.    For 
each  pair,  one  face  was  “neutral”  (the  gaze  in  the  picture  was 
straight  ahead).    The  second  face  in  each  pair  depicted  an  averted 
gaze  (the  face  pointed  straight  ahead  with  the  eyes  focused  to  the 
right or left).  Participants pressed a button indicating the direction 
of  the  arrow  (up  or  down).  On  a  “congruent”  trial,  the  arrow 
appeared on the same side as the gaze‐averted face, whereas on an 
“incongruent” trial it appeared on the side of the neutral face.   EEG 
was  collected  throughout  the  task,  time‐locked  to  stimuli 
presentation,  and  transformed  into  ERP.    We  examined  group 
differences  in  the  N1  (the  ERP  component  related  to  spatial 
attention;  Luck,  2005)  from  the  two  occipital  sites.  We 
hypothesized that if attention to rejection (rejection sensitivity) has 
a  neurological  basis,  then  we  would  find  evidence  of  heightened 
activation  in  the  N1  component  for  high  rejection‐sensitive 
adolescents.   
We  conducted  a  2  (Trial  Type: 
Congruent/Incongruent)  X  2  (Site  Location:  O1/O2)  x  2  (Group: 
average/high)  mixed  ANOVA  to  examine  group  differences  in  the 
amplitude  of  the  N1  component.  Analyses  supported  our 
hypothesis, revealing a main effect of Group for N1 mean amplitude, 
F  (1,  20)  =  7.09,  p  =  .015  and  a  Trial  Type  x  Site  Location 
interaction, F (1, 20) = 6.26, p = .021. The findings suggest a neural 
basis  for  individual  differences  in  face  processing  as  a  function  of 
rejection sensitivity. We will discuss implications and opportunities 
for future research.  

Previous  literature  suggests  that  asymmetries  in  frontal  brain 
activity  are  the  product  of  both  individual  differences  in  emotion 
regulation  strategies  and  the  emotional  demands  of  experimental 
conditions under which EEG is recorded (Coan et al., 2006; Coan & 
Allen, 2004). For the present study, EEG activity was recorded from 
47  college‐age  participants  both  at  rest  and  while  participants 
watched emotionally salient video clips. Participants completed the 
Emotion  Regulation  Questionnaire  (Gross  &  John,  2003),  followed 
by  an  emotion  regulation  task  where  they  were  instructed  to 
increase,  decrease  or  maintain  their  natural  emotion  response 
while watching a series of 3‐5 minute video clips. More left‐frontal 
activity  recorded  during  the  films  significantly  corresponded  with 
greater  reliance  on  the  emotion  regulation  strategy  of  cognitive 
reappraisal.  To  the  extent  that  a  pattern  of  relatively  greater  left 
prefrontal  activity  indexes  an  approach  oriented  regulation 
strategy,  these  observations  suggest  that  cognitive  reappraisal  is 
itself  partly  an  approach  or  engagement  oriented  regulatory 
strategy.    Moreover,  to  the  extent  that  relatively  greater  left 
prefrontal  activity  is  associated  with  positive  affect  and  decreased 
risk of affective disorders, these observations support strategies of 
cognitive  reappraisal  as  a  more  effective  regulatory  strategy  than 
strategies emphasizing behavioral suppression.  

E40
Aspects of Neuroticism and the Amygdala:
Chronic Tuning from Motivational Styles- N.L. 
Arbuckle,  The  Ohio  State  University;  A.A.  Jahn,  The  Ohio  State 
University; S.M. Mowrer, The Ohio State University; A.M. Abduljalil, The 
Ohio  State  University;  W.A  Cunningham,  The  Ohio  State  University‐ 
Recent research and theory has highlighted the dynamic nature of 
amygdala  activation.  Rather  than  simply  being  sensitive  to  a  few 
limited  stimulus  categories,  amygdala  activation  appears  to  be 
dependent  on  the  goals  of  the  perceiver.  In  this  study,  we  extend 
this  line  of  work  by  demonstrating  that  the  means  by  which  a 
person  seeks  to  accomplish  a  goal  also  modulates  the  amygdala 
response.    Specifically,  we  examine  the  modulatory  effects  of  the 
aspects  of  neuroticism  (volatility/withdrawal),  a  personality 
variable  that  has  been  linked  to  both  generalized  anxiety  and 
differences in amygdala sensitivity. Whereas neuroticism‐volatility 
is  proposed  to  be  associated  with  the  fight‐flight‐freeze  system 
(FFFS)  and  a  sensitivity  for  any  cues  of  negativity,  neuroticism‐
withdrawal  is  proposed  to  be  associated  with  the  behavioral 
inhibition system (BIS) and a generalized tendency toward passive 
avoidance. During fMRI scanning, participants were presented with 
positive,  negative,  and  neutral  images  and  were  required  to 
approach  (move  perceptually  closer)  or  avoid  (move  perceptually 
farther  away)  stimuli  in  different  blocks  of  trials.  Consistent  with 
hypotheses proposing a dissociation between these two aspects of 
neuroticism,  participants  higher  in  neuroticism‐volatility  had 
increased  amygdala  activation  to  negative  stimuli  (regardless  of 
whether  they  were  approached  or  avoided),  whereas  participants 
higher  in  neuroticism‐withdrawal  had  increased  amygdala 
activation  to  all  approached  stimuli  (regardless  of  stimulus 
valence).  These  data  provide  further  support  for  the  motivational 
salience  hypothesis  of  amygdala  function,  and  demonstrate  that 
both the ends and means of goal pursuit are important for shaping a 
response.    

E42
The influence of cognitive regulation on the
anticipation of monetary losses- Laura  N.  Martin, 
Rutgers  University;  and  Mauricio  R.  Delgado,  Rutgers  University‐ 
Aversive experiences are unpleasant and at times unavoidable.  One 
method that has been shown to be effective in reducing the anxiety 
associated  with  an  aversive  stimulus,  such  as  an  emotionally 
disturbing image, is the application of cognitive emotion regulation 
strategies  (e.g.,  Ochsner  &  Gross,  2005).  Such  cognitive  regulation 
strategies  have  also  been  shown  to  be  beneficial  in  diminishing 
conditioned  fear  associated  with  the  anticipation  of  primary 
aversive  stimuli  (electric  shock)  via  cortical  modulation  of 
subcortical  targets  such  as  the  amygdala  and  striatum  (Delgado  et 
al.,  2008).   It  is  unclear,  however,  if  cognitive  regulation  can  also 

E41
ERP Amplitude Differences to Ambiguous Face
Images as a Function of Females’ Rejection
Sensitivity-  Katherine  B.  Ehrlich,  University  of  Maryland,  College 
Park; Sarah Gerson, University of Maryland, College Park; Erin Cannon, 
University  of  Maryland,  College  Park;  Ross  Vanderwert,  University  of 

 

[32] 

influence  anticipatory  responses  to  negative  consequences  more 
common  in  daily  life,  for  instance  the  loss  of  money.   The  current 
fMRI  study  examined  the  effect  of  an  imagery‐focused  cognitive 
regulation  strategy  on  subjective  and  neural  responses  associated 
with  the  anticipation  or  expectation  of  monetary  losses.   After 
earning  a  bank  of  money  playing  a  gambling  game,  participants 
encountered different colored squares, which were paired with one 
of the following outcomes: always losing money (punish cue), never 
losing  money  (safe  cue)  and  a  chance  of  losing  money  (variable 
cue).  Each cue had three distinct phases: 1) presentation, in which 
the  colored  square  appeared;  2)  anticipation,  in  which  a  question 
mark  appeared  inside  the  square  designating  that  the  outcome 
would  be  revealed  in  about  5s;  and  3)  outcome,  in  which 
participants  saw  the  financial  outcome  of  the  square.   Prior  to  the 
presentation  of  the  squares,  participants  were  instructed  to  either 
look  at  the  squares  and  respond  naturally  (look  condition)  or  to 
regulate  by  imagining  a  relaxing  scene  in  their  mind  during  the 
anticipation period (relax condition).  The instruction words "Look" 
and  "Relax"  were  given  in  a  pseudo‐blocked  fashion,  every  six 
square  trials.   Subjective  ratings  acquired  after  individual  trials 
suggested that cognitive regulation was effective in diminishing the 
negative  affect  associated  with  the  aversive  cues  (punish  and 
variable).   Successful  cognitive  regulation  also  modulated  BOLD 
signals  in  the  striatum,  a  region  typically  implicated  in  affective 
learning  and  reward‐related  processing,  with  preliminary  results 
showing  decreased  responses  during  anticipation  of  predictable 
and  variable  losses.   This  finding  has  important  implications  for 
decision‐making,  as  research  continues  to  probe  how  negative 
emotions  evoked  by  the  expectation  of  losses  contribute  to  risky 
decision‐making. 

with‐in  subjects  2x2  design  of  Emotional  Challenge  (sport‐specific 
and non sport‐specific) x Appraisal Strategy (cognitive reappraisal 
and  passive  viewing)  will  be  executed.    The  General  Linear  Model 
(boxcar  models  representing  the  picture‐viewing  period  of  each 
condition)  will  be  used  to  create  subtraction  contrasts  for  each 
subject: 1) Cognitive Reappraisal > Passive Viewing Neutral and 2) 
Passive Viewing Negative > Passive Viewing Neutral for both sport‐
specific  and  non  sport‐specific  conditions.  These  contrasts  will  be 
then  entered  into  a  one‐sample  t  test  to  perform  a  random‐effects 
group  analysis.  Conjunction  analysis  will  be  used  to  test  the  two 
competing  models.  In  the  event  of  a  domain  specific  model,  the 
predicted  high  degree  of  similarity  between  the  endogenous 
response  to  sport‐specific  negative  images  and  cued  cognitive 
reappraisal  will  be  tested  by  a  conjunction  between  (a)  Sport‐
Specific  Cognitive  Reappraisal>  Passive  Neutral  and    (b)  Sport‐
Specific  Passive  Negative>  Passive  Neutral  (the  subtraction 
contrasts  will  be  jointly  significantly  active  and  undifferentiated. 
Conjunction analysis will also be applied to the non sports‐specific 
images.  Similar  findings  as  that  observed  in  the  sports‐specific 
images will support a domain general model of emotion regulation 
in this population. The results of the study could inform the nature 
of  interventions  to  promote  optimal  emotion  regulation  under 
challenge.  
 
E44
Psychophysiological and neural correlates
of risk-sensitive decision-making- Bettina  Studer, 
University  of  Cambridge;  Annemieke  Apergis‐Schoute,  University  of 
Cambridge;  Trevor  W.  Robbins,  University  of  Cambridge;  and  Luke 
Clark, University of Cambridge‐ Economic models of decision‐making 
propose  that  humans  integrate  the  information  about  the 
magnitude  and  probabilities of all  outcomes, in order  to  select  the 
option  with  the  highest  utility.  However,  recent  neuroscience 
research suggests that these models may under‐estimate the role of 
emotions  in  guiding  human  choice.    Two  studies  using  a  novel 
gambling task were conducted. In the first study we examined how 
behavioural  responses  and  psychophysiological  arousal  were 
differentially  affected  by  a)  the  requirement  to  make  an  active 
choice, b) the chances of winning and c) the bet magnitude. In the 
second study we tested how neural activity during decision‐making 
was  modulated  by  the  aforementioned  factors.  Healthy  university 
students  completed  the  Roulette  Betting  Task  (study  1:  n  =  30, 
study  2:  n  =  18).  Two  trial  types  were  contrasted:  “active‐choice‐
trials”, in which the subject was required to select a bet, and fixed‐
bet  “no‐choice‐trials”  (matched  for  monetary  gain).  Probability  of 
winning/losing  and  bet  magnitude  were  manipulated  across  both 
trial types. In study 1, psychophysiological responses were assessed 
by  measuring  heart  rate  (HR)  and  skin  conductance  responses 
(SCR).  In  study  2,  functional  images  were  acquired  (3‐T,  TR=  2s) 
using  a  standard  echo‐planar  imaging  sequence  with  an  event‐
related  design.  Data  analysis  was  conducted  using  Statistical 
Parametric  Mapping  (SPM5)  software,  with  a  canonical 
hemodynamic  response  function  modeled  to  the  onsets  of  the 
selection  phase.  Whole‐brain  analyses  were  thresholded  at  p<.001 
uncorrected.  The  results  of  this  study  showed  that  behavioural, 
psychophysiological  and  neural  responses  were  modulated  by  a) 
the requirement for active choice, b) the winning chances and c) the 
bet  magnitude.  First,  active‐choice‐trials  were  associated  with 
faster  decisions,  stronger  psychophysiological  responses  (HR  and 
SCRs)  and  increased  activation  of  the  anterior  cingulate  cortex, 
striatum, midbrain, frontal areas and parietal regions compared to 
no‐choice‐trials.  Second,  participants  adjusted  their  bets  to  the 
winning  chances  on  active‐choice‐trials,  placing  higher  bets  on 
trials with higher chances of winning. Higher winning chances were 
also  associated  with  increased  neural  activity  in  the  ventromedial 
prefrontal  cortex  and  parietal  cortex  during  selection  of  a  risky 

e43
Examination
of
the
Brain
Processes
Underlying Emotion Regulation within a
Stress Resilient Population- Michelle  Costanzo, 
University  of  Maryland,  College  Park;  John  VanMeter,  Georgetown 
University;  Matt  Miller,  University  of  Maryland,  College  Park;  Jessica 
Oldham, University of Maryland, College Park; Bart Russell, University 
of  Maryland,  College  Park;  Brad  Hatfield,  University  of  Maryland, 
College  Park‐  Emotion  robustly  affects  the  quality  of  cognitive‐
motor performance under conditions of mental stress. As such, the 
regulation  of  emotion  is  critical  to  successful  execution  of  motor 
skills  during  competition.  Previous  investigations  of  the  arousal‐
performance  relationship  have  typically  focused  on  behavioral 
outcomes but it is unclear if those who have demonstrated superior 
performance under stress exhibit brain responses characterized by 
an  adaptive  emotion  regulatory  strategy  (cognitive  reappraisal). 
Using  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI)  this  study 
seeks  to  determine  if  cognitive  reappraisal  is  spontaneously 
recruited  during  emotional  challenge  in  individuals  who  have 
demonstrated  superior  cognitive‐motor  performance  under  stress 
(12  intercollegiate  football  players).  This  emotion  regulatory 
response  is  characterized  by  a  pattern  such  that,  the  lateral 
prefrontal  cortex  will  be  inversely  related  to  amygdala.  This  study 
will  test  two  competing  models  of  emotion  regulation;  one  that 
predicts  a  specificity  of  the  endogenous  regulatory  response  to 
emotion  challenge  (domain  specific  model  of  emotion  regulation) 
while the other predicts a ubiquitous stress resilience independent 
of  experience  (domain  general  model  of  emotion  regulation). 
Following  the  approach  developed  by  Goldin  et  al.  (2008)  and 
Ochsner  et  al.  (2004)  this  fMRI  investigation  will  evaluated  the 
BOLD  response  during  negative  and  neutral  visually  presented 
images.  Non  sport‐specific  negative  and  neutral  images  were 
selected from the International Affective Picture System (Lang et al., 
1999).  In  addition,  sport‐specific  negative  images  will  be  used 
representing  unpleasant  events  and  experiences  during 
competition  (negative  images  matched  for  valence  and  arousal).  A 

 

[33] 

option.  Cardiac  deceleration  was  greater  in  trials  with  smaller 
winning  chances.  Third,  high‐bet‐trials  were  associated  with 
stronger  selection‐related  skin  conductance  responses  and  a 
greater  neural  response  in  medial  prefrontal  and  frontal  areas, 
anterior cingulate cortex and parietal regions compared to low‐bet‐
trials. The results of this work highlight close coupling of peripheral 
arousal (as a marker of emotional responding) and cognitive factors 
linked to risky choice, during a simulated gambling task. Gambling 
decisions  were  accompanied  by  phasic  changes  in 
psychophysiological  arousal  and  these  psychophysiological 
responses  were  sensitive  to  the  riskiness  of  a  decision. 
Psychophysiological  arousal  during  decision‐making  was  sensitive 
to  the  requirement  for  active  choice,  despite  balancing  for 
monetary  gain,  and  this  may  relate  to  illusory  control  phenomena 
in  gambling.  Finally  the  results  of  this  study  indicate  that  the 
requirement  for  active  choice,  the  chances  of  winning  and  the  bet 
magnitude  all  differentially  modulate  neural  activity  in  areas 
involved  in  conflict,  reward  processing  and  quantity  estimation, 
during the selection of risky options. 

and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) are critical for reward processing.
Research suggests these structures are differentially involved in distinct
phases (e.g., anticipatory and consummatory) of reward processing;
striatal and mPFC regions have been linked to anticipatory and
consummatory phases, respectively. However, emerging conditioning
research suggests that reward-related regions are differentially recruited
based upon predictability and reward learning. Specifically, this
research suggests that unexpected reward predictors and unexpected
reward delivery elicit activation in striatal and OFC regions while
completely expected rewards are not associated with striatal activation.
This functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study evaluated
brain activation in response to (1) stimuli predicting frequent/infrequent
rewards and (2) expected/unexpected reward delivery, after reward
contingencies were learned. Additionally, this study examined how
reward-related neural activation is associated with behavioral strategies
to maximize reward. We hypothesized that reward predictors as well as
unexpected reward delivery would elicit elevated activation in the
striatum and OFC/mPFC once stimulus-reward contingencies were
learned. Furthermore we hypothesized that behavioral strategies to
maximize reward would be positively associated with activation in the
striatum and OFC in response to both stimuli predicting frequent reward
and unexpected reward delivery. Twenty-nine psychiatrically healthy
participants completed a probabilistic reward learning task while fMRI
data were acquired. A finite impulse response (FIR) model was used to
analyze activation elicited by stimuli predicting a high or low
probability of reward as well as reward delivery following these
different stimuli. Reward learning was associated with elevated OFC
activation in response to stimuli predicting frequent rewards. After
reward learning had occurred, stimuli predicting frequent rewards were
associated with elevated activation in the bilateral putamen and medial
OFC, while unexpected reward delivery was associated with elevated
activation in the bilateral caudate and medial prefrontal cortex. These
results suggest that similar structures are involved in anticipatory and
consummatory phases of reward processing contingent upon prior
learning and predictability, and that OFC activation is associated with
behavioral strategies to maximize reward. Reduced OFC activation to
reward predictors may reflect dysfunctional formation of stimulusreward outcome associations that may promote the development of
anhedonia.
 

E45
Experienced Yoga Practitioners Exhibit Both
Increased Frontal and Decreased Limbic
Activation During Emotional Information
Processing. Leslie  A.  Modlin,  Duke  University  Medical  Center; 
Rachel V. Kozink, Duke University Medical Center; F. Joseph McClernon, 
Duke  University  Medical  Center;  and  Brett  Froeliger,  Duke  University 
Medical  Center‐  Yoga  meditation  has  been  reported  to  enhance 
cognition  and  improve  mood.  In  addition,  the  extant  literature 
suggests that yoga may reduce negative affect in populations prone 
to  mood  disturbances.  However,  the  effects  of  yoga  on  the  neural 
substrates  of  affective  and  executive  function  are  not  well  known. 
The current pilot study used fMRI to evaluate the neural correlates 
of emotional information processing in experienced practitioners of 
Hatha Yoga. BOLD‐fMRI images were acquired in a sample of yogis 
(n = 7) and matched yoga‐naïve controls (n = 7) while performing 
an  affective  Stroop  Task  (aST).  The  aST  presented  neutral  and 
negative  emotional  distractor  images  while  participants  were 
engaged in either a demanding judgment task or a passive viewing 
trial. Statistical threshold was set at p<.05, FWE corrected. Yogis, as 
compared  to  controls,  exhibited  greater  task‐related  activation  in 
regions  subserving  executive  function  (e.g.,  dorsal  anterior 
cingulate gyrus,  dorsomedial prefrontal cortex) and less activation 
in  regions  underlying  emotional  processes  (e.g.,  amygdala, 
posterior insula and cingulate gyrus [PCG]).  These results may be 
summarized by two novel findings.  Yogis, as compared to controls, 
exhibited  relative  greater  activation  in  circuitry  involved  in 
executive  function,  a  finding  consistent  with  the  cognitive 
enhancement  reported  by  experienced  yoga  practitioners.    In 
addition,  yogis  exhibited  relative  decreased  activation  in  regions 
underlying  emotional  processes.    These  findings  may  provide  a 
neural  marker  for  the  mood‐enhancing  effects  of  yoga.  Taken 
together,  these  patterns  of  activation  suggest  that  long‐term  yoga 
practice  may  reduce  affective  interference  with  ongoing  cognitive 
demands. The results from this pilot study will be discussed within 
the  context  of  the  putative  beneficial  effects  of  yoga  on  emotional 
information processing. 

E47
Social cues influence elementary sound
perception- Jeremy  I.  Borjon,  Pinceton  University;  Stephen  V. 
Shepherd,  Princeton  University;  Alexander  Todorov,  Princeton 
University, Asif A. Ghazanfar, Princeton University‐  Most research into 
the  interaction  between  perceived  social  cues  and  multisensory 
integration  focuses  on  audiovisual  speech  and  emotions,  but 
neglects  other  potential  influences  of  social  cues  on  sensory 
perception.  We  report  a  novel  demonstration  of  multimodal  social 
processing,  which  gives  rise  to  a  form  of  perceptual  contagion: 
seeing another individual looking left or right changes the way we 
perceive sound. Subjects first saw a face stimulus and then heard a 
sound  originate  from  one  of  six  locations.  When  faces  appeared 
looking  to  the  subject's  left  or  right,  sound  localization  near  the 
midline  were  biased  in  the  direction  of  observed  gaze.  This 
perceptual shift was robust to changes in facial expression and was 
neither  suppressed  nor  enhanced  by  facial  expressivity.  These 
findings  suggest  that  our  perceptions  are  distorted  toward 
congruence  with  others’  orientating  behavior,  and  imply  that  like 
motor behaviors, facial expressions, emotional states, and attention, 
perceptions can be “contagious” 

E46
Reward
learning
and
reward-related
neural activation.-Ryan  Bogdan,  Harvard  University, 
University  of  Mississippi,  Duke  University;  Avram  J  HolmesHarvard 
University; Daniel G Dillon, Harvard University; and Diego A Pizzagalli, 
Harvard University‐ The midbrain, striatum, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC)

 

[34] 

E48
Emotional and Social perception in a rare
case of developmental visual agnosia- Hillel 
Aviezer, Princeton University; Yaacov Trope, New York University; Ran 
R.  Hassin,  Hebrew  University  of  Jerusalem;  Shlomo  Bentin,  Hebrew 
University  of  Jerusalem;  Anat  Perry,  Hebrew  University  of  Jerusalem; 
and  Alexander  Todorov,  Princeton  University‐  Developmental  visual 
agnosia  is  a  rare  and  poorly  understood  condition.  Unlike 
developmental prosopagnosics who display specific difficulties with 
face  identity,  developmental  visual  agnosia  may  present  with 
deficient visual integration, object recognition, and face processing. 
Although recent investigations have explored the visual and neural 
processing  in  developmental  visual  agnosia,  little  is  known  about 
how  these  individuals  visually  process  social  and  affective 
information.    In  the  current  set  of  studies  we  examined  emotional  
and  social  perception  in  case  LG,  a  21  year  old  individual  with 
developmental  visual  agnosia  characterized  by  profoundly 
impaired  visual  integration.  In  study  1  we  examined  LG’s 
recognition  of  isolated  and  contextualized  basic  emotions.  LG  was 
found to be impaired at recognizing isolated facial expressions.  In 
contrast  he  was  able  to  recognize  emotions  expressed  by  highly 
distinctive  and  prototypical  emotional  bodies  when  the  face  was 
removed. Nevertheless, his ability to detect the emotion expressed 
by  a  face  did  not  improve  even  if  it  was  embedded  in  an 
emotionally‐congruent  body  context.    Furthermore,  in  contrast  to 
controls, LG displayed an abnormal pattern of contextual influence 
from  emotionally‐incongruent  bodies.  These  findings  suggest  that 
the  general  integration  deficit  in  developmental  visual  agnosia 
extends to the level of the full person unit.In study 2 we examined 
LG’s recognition of social, non‐emotional facial information. To this 
end,  we  presented  him  with  a  set  of  300  faces  normed  for 
dominance,  trustworthiness,  and  attractiveness.  LG’s  performance 
was  examined  by  comparing  his  face  ratings  of  extremely  high  (> 
90th  Percentile)  vs.  extremely  low  (<  10th  percentile)  norm  rated 
stimuli.  The  results  showed  that  LG  did  not  differentiate  highly 
trustworthy  from  highly  untrustworthy  faces,  and  he  did  not 
differentiate  highly  dominant  from  highly  non‐dominant  faces.  By 
contrast,  he  was  capable  of  differentiating  highly  attractive  from 
highly  unattractive  faces.  Furthermore,  LG’s  ratio  of  male‐female 
faces within the attractive and unattractive face groups was similar 
to  that  of  controls.  These  findings  suggest  that  the  perception  of 
attractiveness may be more basic and functionally dissociated from 
the  perception  of  social  dimensions  of  trustworthiness  and 
dominance. Put together, our results indicate that unlike the more 
common  developmental  prosopagnosics  who  typically  display 
intact  recognition  of  emotion  and  social  traits,  individuals  with 
developmental visual agnosia may manifest with profound deficits 
in social and emotional perception.    
 

 

[35] 

simultaneously  recorded  the  participants’  brain  potentials.  During 
the negative pictures processing, the participants under the happy‐
prime  condition  showed  the  smaller  N2  magnitude  at  the  centro‐
parietal  cortex  compared  to  the  sad‐prime  condition.  This  result 
may indicate that optimistic people automatically pay less attention 
to  the  negative  events.  Furthermore,  during  the  positive  pictures 
processing,  the  participants  under  the  happy‐prime  condition 
showed  larger  late  positive  potentials  compared  to  the  sad‐prime 
condition  suggesting  that  the  optimistic  people  may  have  more 
sustained  positive  emotion  intrinsically.  Collectively,  our  results 
manifested  that  “the  attitude  determines  the  altitude,”  when 
encountering emotional challenges. 

Poster Session J
J1
EEG
RESPONSES
TO
EMOTIONAL
IMAGES:
EXAMINATION OF THE EFFECTS OF RUMINATION
AND DISTRACTION IN DEPRESSION- Michael  W.  Duke, 
University  of  Wisconsin‐Milwaukee;  Elizabeth  L.  Steuer,  University  of 
Wisconsin‐Milwaukee;  Lauren  E.  Taubitz,  University  of  Wisconsin‐
Milwaukee;  Emily  L.  Belleau,  University  of  Wisconsin‐Milwaukee;  and 
Christine L. Larson, University of Wisconsin‐Milwaukee‐ Recent studies 
have  shown  a  positive  correlation  between  rumination  and 
intensification of depressive episodes, whereas tendencies towards 
distraction  have  been  shown  to  mitigate  negative  affect.  The 
current  study  aims  to  assess  the  causal  relationship  between 
rumination,  distraction,  and  prolonged  reactions  to  discrete 
unpleasant  events,  by  examining  the  degree  to  which  rumination 
prolongs  and  distraction  abbreviates  responses  to  unpleasant 
affective  stimuli  using  EEG.66  participants  each  completed  an  8‐
minute  rumination/distraction  paradigm  modeled  on  the  one 
developed by Lyubomirsky and Nolen‐Hoeksema. Participants each 
read  a  series  of  45  items:  for  the  rumination  induction  group,  the 
items encouraged them to focus on themselves, their own emotions, 
and cognitions; for the distraction induction group, the items asked 
them to focus their attention externally. Immediately following the 
rumination/distraction  induction  each  participant  completed  a 
picture  viewing  paradigm  during  which  EEG  data  was  recorded. 
Visual  stimuli  were  each  presented  for  5  seconds  and  consisted  of 
120  IAPS  pictures,  40  each  of  unpleasant,  neutral,  and  pleasant 
images.  Event‐related  potentials  in  reaction  to  the  images  were 
analyzed  in  terms  of  Late  Positive  Potential  (LPP)  (550‐1000  ms) 
amplitudes  at  electrode  site  CPz.  After  concluding  the  picture 
presentation  participants  completed  a  series  of  questionnaires. 
Scores  from  the  Mood  and  Anxiety  Symptom  Questionnaire’s 
subscale  for  anhedonic  depression  (MASQ‐ADP)  were  used  to 
classify  participants  into  depressed  and  control  groups. 
Participants  who  scored  above  the  median  of  the  observed 
distribution  on  the  MASQ‐ADP  (sum>58)  were  deemed  depressed 
(n=28),  whereas  those  scoring  in  the  lower  half  (sum<58)  were 
deemed controls (n=27). Subjects who scored exactly at the median 
(n=11)  were  excluded  from  analyses.  A  significant  interaction 
occurred  for  mood  induction  by  image  valence  (F=3.57,  p=.032), 
with distraction resulting in bigger LPPs for unpleasant images and 
rumination  bigger  LPPs  for  neutral  and  pleasant  images.  Level  of 
depression  did  not  significantly  contribute  to  this  effect,  as 
evidenced  by  the  observation  that  both  depressed  and  control 
groups  elicited  significantly  greater  LPPs  for  unpleasant  images 
compared  to  neutral  ones  (t=2.62,  p=.014  and  t=2.17,  p=.039, 
respectively).  These  findings  contradict  the  hypothesis  that 
rumination would prolong and distraction abbreviate responses to 
unpleasant images. 

j3
Neural dynamics of risky decision and their
consequences in a sequential task  Benoit  Bediou, 
University  of  Geneva,  Laboratory  for  the  Study  of  Emotion  Elicitation 
and  Expression;  Lorenz  Goette,  University  of  Lausanne;  and  David 
Sander,  University  of  Geneva,  Laboratory  for  the  Study  of  Emotion 
Elicitation and Expression‐ Converging evidence shows that there are 
multiple  representations  of  reward  and  risk  in  the  brain.  Yet,  how 
these  representations  relate  to  distinct  mechanisms  underlying 
action  selection  remains  unclear.  Moreover,  the  role  of  individual 
differences  in  neural  representation  reward  and  risk  sensitivity  is 
also  poorly  understood.  We  recorded  EEG  while  participants 
performed  a  sequential  risk‐taking  task  and  used  a  model‐based 
approach to investigate the impact of reward‐related computations 
(expected  outcome,  prediction  error)  and  risk‐related 
computations  (expected  return,  variance)  Medial  Frontal 
Negativities  (MFNs).Response‐related  ERPs  showed  that  an  early 
MFN  generated  in  the  primary  sensorymotor  cortex  and 
orbitofrontal cortex correlated with the Expected‐Outcome of each 
decision,  suggesting  that  these  regions  are  sensitive  to  the  reward 
value or utility of an option.  By contrast, a late MFN with sources in 
the  ACC  correlated  with  Expected‐Return  and  was  enhanced  on 
decisions  with  negative  compared  to  positive  expected  return, 
consistent  with  a  role  in  the  anticipation  of  potentially  negative 
consequences. Feedback‐related (loss‐minus‐win) ERPs showed an 
early and a late MFN which correlated positively with variance and 
negatively  with  prediction  error.  The  early  ERN  was  additionally 
sensitive  to  individual  differences  in  risk‐sensitivity  as  measured 
during the task; the greater the risk‐aversion the greater the early‐
MFN. Both components were generated in the ACC, suggesting that 
this regions performs a rapid subjective (“emotional”) evaluation of 
outcomes  which  is  sensitive  to  individual  differences  in  risk‐
sensitivity,  followed  by  a  slower  but  more  objective  (“rational”) 
evaluation of outcomes on the basis of economics parameters (e.g. 
magnitude and probability of reward). Our findings support a role 
for the ACC in both reinforcement learning and in the anticipation 
of  negative  consequences  of  one’s  actions  and  suggest  that  the 
appraisal  of  risk  may  actually  comprise  several  spatially  and 
temporally  dissociable  processes,  some  of  which  reflect  a  more 
subjective representation of risk than others.  

j2
Neural correlates of implicit attitudes
towards positive and negative emotions-  Chi‐
Kuang  Sun,  National  Yang‐Ming  University;  Yu‐Ying  Chou,  National 
Yang‐Ming University; and Li‐Fen Chen, National Yang‐Ming University‐ 
Many  studies  have  investigated  that  how  emotion  influenced  our 
cognition,  including  attention,  preferences,  judgments,  memories, 
and  etc.  In  sum,  the  different  contexts  could  result  in  the  various 
emotion‐cognition interactions. However, very little is known about 
the impact of implicit emotions or predispositional attitudes on our 
reactions to emotional challenges. In the current study, we aimed to 
explore  the  neural  bases  underpinning  the  optimistic  and 
pessimistic  attitudes  towards  the  positive  and  negative  emotions. 
We  used  the  unconsciously  emotional  priming  task  and 

 

j4
Nothing compared to comparisons! An fMRI
study on the neural correlates of person
comparison. Gayannee  Kedia,  University  of  Cologne,  Bangor 
University;  Thomas  Mussweiler,  University  of  Cologne;  Paul  Mullins, 
Bangor  University;  David  Linden,  Bangor  University­  The  horizontal 
part  of  the  intraparietal  sulcus  (HIPS)  seems  to  be  specifically 
dedicated to quantity assessment. It is activated by comparisons of 
numbers  and  of  simple  characteristics  such  as  the  size  and 
luminance  of  a  stimulus.  Its  activity  depends  on  a  distance  effect: 
the  closer  two  quantities,  the  more  difficult  to  compare  and  the 
greater  the  HIPS  activity.  The  present  experiment  extended  this 

[36] 

research  to  person  comparison,  one  of  the  most  ubiquitous  social 
cognitive processes. We hypothesized that comparing two persons’ 
body  height  or  beauty  involves  similar  processes  as  comparing 
numbers  and  thus  also  recruits  the  HIPS.  25  women  underwent 
fMRI scanning. Stimuli were full‐length pictures of women or dogs 
displayed  in  pairs  (i.e.  two  women  or  two  dogs  at  once). 
Participants had to compare the height (Which woman – or dog – is 
taller?)  or  beauty  (Which  woman  –  or  dog  –  is  more  beautiful?)  of 
these  targets.  For  half  of  the  comparisons,  the  targets  were  close 
concerning the characteristic to compare, i.e. were similarly tall or 
beautiful (low distance conditions); whereas for the other half, one 
target  was  markedly  taller  or  more  beautiful  than  the  other  (high 
distance  conditions).  These  comparative  conditions  were 
contrasted  to  non‐comparative  control  conditions,  in  which 
participants  had  to  indicate  whether  both  targets  had  their  mouth 
open or not. fMRI results are presented with a threshold of p<.001 
(uncorrected for multiple comparisons), and a correction for spatial 
extent (p<.05 uncorrected for multiple comparisons).   Participants 
were  faster  for  high  distance  comparisons  than  low  distance 
comparisons  for  height  and  beauty  judgments  of  women  and  of 
dogs.  Low  distance  comparisons  lead  to  greater  activity  than  high 
distance comparisons in bilateral superior parietal areas including 
the  HIPS  as  well  as  in  occipital  and  fusiform  areas,  for  height  and 
beauty comparisons of women and of dogs. Height comparisons of 
dogs  and  women  were  associated  with  greater  activity  in  bilateral 
superior  parietal  clusters  including  the  HIPS  than  the  control 
conditions.  The  contrasts  between  the  two  beauty  comparisons 
conditions  and  the  control  conditions  did  not  reveal  any  activated 
cluster neither for the dogs nor for the women. Height comparisons 
triggered more activity than beauty comparisons in a right parietal 
cluster  including  the  HIPS.  This  was  true  both  when  the  targets 
were  dogs  and  women.  Conversely,  beauty  comparisons  were 
associated  with  increased  BOLD  response  in  the  fusiform  gyrus. 
The  behavioral  distance  effects  and  the  HIPS  recruitment  for  the 
height  and  beauty  comparisons  suggest  that  social  judgments 
involve  similar  mechanisms  as  number  processing.  In  addition, 
results  indicate  that  body  height  comparisons  recruit  more  the 
HIPS,  and  beauty  judgments  elicit  more  activity  in  the  fusiform 
gyrus. Thus comparative judgments of height and beauty seem also 
to be supported by distinct processes that take place in brain areas 
specifically  related  to  the  dimension  to  be  compared:  in  regions 
involved  in  spatial  representation  for  height  judgments  and  in 
regions involved in face perception for beauty comparisons. 

consistent with their expectations about each individual, and half of 
which  were  inconsistent  with  those  expectations.    A  separate 
functional  localizer  was  used  to  identify  regions  of  cortex 
preferentially  involved  in  social  impression‐formation.    Consistent 
with prior research on the neural bases of impression formation, a 
region of dorsomedial prefrontal cortex emerged from this analysis.  
As hypothesized, interrogating this region of interest revealed that 
when  participants  did  not  depend  on  the  target  for  a  desired 
outcome,  regions  involved  in  impression‐formation  were  more 
heavily  recruited  for  expectancy‐consistent  information  than  for 
expectancy‐inconsistent  information;  however,  the  opposite 
pattern emerged when participants did depend on the target for a 
desired  outcome—with  greater  engagement  of  impression‐
formation  processes  being  recruited  for  expectancy‐inconsistent 
information than for expectancy‐inconsistent information. Outcome 
dependency thus focused neural activations on the more diagnostic 
cues.  This  study  points  to  the  flexibility  of  social  perception  and 
people’s  adaptive  ability  to  alter  their  impression  formation 
strategies as a function of their goals.    
j6
Making sense by making sentient: Neural and
behavioral
evidence
for
preferential
anthropomorphism of unpredictable agentsAdam Waytz, Harvard University; Carey Morewedge, Carnegie Mellon 
University;  Nicholas  Epley,  University  of  Chicago;  George  Monteleone, 
University  of  Chicago;  Jia‐Hong  Gao,  University  of  Chicago;  and  John 
Cacioppo, 
University 
of 
Chicago‐ 
People 
commonly 
anthropomorphize  nonhuman  agents,  imbuing  everything  from 
computers  to  pets  to  gods  with  humanlike  capacities  and  mental 
experiences.  Although  widely  observed,  the  determinants  of 
anthropomorphism  remain  poorly  understood.  We  propose  that 
people  anthropomorphize,  in  part,  to  satisfy  effectance 
motivation—the  basic  and  chronic  motivation  to  attain  mastery  of 
one’s  environment  (what  Dennett,  1987,  called  the  intentional 
stance).  We conducted two studies to test this hypothesis.  Because 
the  primary  factor  that  elicits  effectance  motivation  is  the 
experience  of  unpredictability,  we  tested  whether  people  would 
preferentially  anthropomorphize  technological  gadgets  that 
operated  unpredictably  compared  to  gadgets  that  operated 
predictably.    In  an  initial  behavioral  study,  participants  evaluated 
30  gadgets,  half  of  which  were  described  as  operating 
unpredictably  and  half  that  were  described  as  unpredictable.    We 
randomly assigned participants to one of two replicate conditions, 
in which we counterbalanced the description type of each gadget—
the  15  gadgets  described  as  predictable  in  replicate  A  were 
described  as  unpredictable  in  replicate  B,  and  vice  versa.    All 
participants  rated  the  extent  to  which  each  gadget  possessed 
mental,  anthropomorphic  qualities  (e.g.,  intention,  emotion, 
consciousness)  as  well  as  nonmental,  nonanthropomorphic 
qualities (e.g., attractiveness, strength, efficiency).  Results showed 
that  participants  rated  unpredictable  gadgets  significantly  higher 
than predictable gadgets on anthropomorphic attributes but not on 
nonanthropomorphic  attributes.    In  a  second  neuroimaging  study, 
participants  read  descriptions  of  the  gadgets  as  in  the  behavioral 
study  and  then  underwent  scanning  while  rating  how  much  each 
gadget  had  a  mind  (as  a  measure  of  anthropomorphism).  
Replicating  the  behavioral  results  of  the  first  study,  participants 
preferentially anthropomorphized unpredictable gadgets compared 
to predictable gadgets.  In addition, an unpredictable > predictable 
gadgets  contrast  revealed  increased  activity  in  the  ventral  medial 
prefrontal  cortex  (vMPFC)—a  region  commonly  involved  in 
mentalizing—during  evaluations  of  unpredictable  gadgets 
compared  to  predictable  gadgets.    In  addition,  a  connectivity 
analysis  revealed  this  vMPFC  region  to  be  correlated  with  a 
network  of  regions  (including  the  precuneus  and  posterior 
cingulate)  implicated  in  mentalizing.    Finally,  a  weighted  analysis 

j5
Outcome
Dependency
and
Impression
Formation Daniel  L.  Ames,  Princeton  University;  and  Susan  T. 
Fiske, Princeton University‐ People have a basic psychological need to 
maintain  coherent  representations  of  others.    But  how  do  human 
beings maintain consistent impressions of other people when other 
people  are  often  inconsistent?    Behavioral  research  suggests  that 
one  frequently  employed  strategy  is  to  simplify  impressions  by 
ignoring  or  discounting  information  that  does  not  cohere  with 
expectations about the target person.  Sometimes, however, people 
engage in the opposite pattern of behavior, paying special attention 
to  novel  or  unexpected  social  information.  The  present  research 
explores  when  expectancy‐inconsistent  information  is  and  is  not 
used in forming impressions of others.  This poster argues that one 
key determinant is outcome‐dependency, that is, whether or not the 
perceiver  depends  on  the  person  perceived  in  order  to  obtain  a 
desired  outcome.    Prior  to  fMRI  scanning,  participants  met  two 
confederates.    Participants  learned  that  they  depended  on  one  of 
these confederates for a desired outcome ($50.00 prize), and were 
also  led  to  form  respectively  positive  or  negative  expectations 
about  the  two  targets.    During  scanning,  participants  viewed  60 
pieces  of  information  about  each  confederate,  half  of  which  were 

 

[37] 

that  incorporated  participants’  explicit  ratings  of  mind  into  the 
fMRI  model  to  produce  a  comparable  unpredictable  >  predictable 
gadgets  contrast  revealed  activation  in  the  same  vMPFC  region.  
This  analysis  demonstrated  a  correspondence  between  explicit 
attribution of mind and vMPFC activation, consistent with previous 
findings  on  the  role  of  this  region  in  mentalizing.    Together,  these 
studies 
demonstrate 
that 
unpredictability 
increases 
anthropomorphism  both  in  terms  of  explicit  ratings  of 
anthropomorphic qualities and activity in brain regions commonly 
involved in mental state attribution.     

the  influence  of  affect  on  individuals’  economic  behavior,  little 
experimental  work  has  manipulated  and  measured  the  impact  of 
incidental  affect  on  individuals’  economic  risk  preferences.  In 
addition,  even  less  is  known  about  the  extent  to  which  behavioral 
patterns  learned  while  in  a  particular  mood  are  carried  forward 
into the future, even in new contexts and mood states. The present 
study  examined  the  short‐term  and  long‐term  influence  of 
experimentally‐induced  happiness  and  sadness  on  individuals’ 
economic risk preferences. Happy and sad moods were induced in 
participants via film clips on two separate, sequential days. Thus, all 
participants  experienced  both  mood  inductions,  with  the  order 
counterbalanced  across  participants.  Subsequent  to  the  mood 
inductions, participants completed an incentive‐compatible version 
of  the  well‐validated  framing  task.  On  each  trial,  participants  start 
with a monetary endowment ranging between $20 and $100. They 
must  then  choose  between  a  gamble  of  winning  all  or  none  of  the 
endowment  versus  a  guaranteed  payment  that  is  a  percentage  of 
the  endowment  ‐  the  expected  value  of  the  gamble  is  equal  to  the 
value of the guaranteed payment. Critically, this guaranteed option 
can  be  presented  as  either  a  gain  or  a  loss  of  a  portion  of  the 
endowment. Thus, on every trial subjects chose to either gamble or 
walk away with a certain amount of money. Previous studies have 
established that participants have a tendency to choose the gamble 
more  frequently  when  the  guaranteed  option  is  framed  as  a  loss 
and to select the guaranteed payment more often when framed as a 
gain. Using a between‐subjects analysis, we found that on the first 
experimental  day  those  participants  exposed  to  a  happy  mood 
induction  accepted  gambles  significantly  more  often  than 
individuals  in  the  sad  condition.  In  addition,  those  in  the  happy 
condition  also  exhibited  a  significantly  greater  framing  effect,  in 
which they gambled more often in the “loss” frame than the “gain” 
frame,  compared  to  participants  in  the  sad  condition.  Strikingly, 
participants’  behavior  on  their  second  day  of  participation  was 
highly consistent with their behavior on day 1, despite experiencing 
mood  induction  in  the  opposite‐valence  direction  on  day  2.  Thus, 
participants in the happy condition on day 1 were still more likely 
to accept gambles and exhibited a greater framing effect on day 2, 
despite  having  sad  mood  induction  on  day  2.    The  present  results 
suggest  that  incidental  mood  has  a  significant  impact  on 
individuals’  economic  risk  preferences,  in  which  happy  mood  is 
related  to  greater  willingness  to  accept  gambles  and  a  greater 
magnitude framing effect as compared to sad mood. Moreover, the 
economic  risk  preference  patterns  established  under  an  initial 
mood  carry  forward  into  the  future.  In  conjunction,  these  data 
suggest  that  incidental  mood  may  have  the  ability  to  shape 
immediate  economic  behavior  in  a  manner  that  subsequently 
predicts long‐term economic behavior.   

j7
Nonconscious Stimulus Differentiation is
Reflected in the P300 EEG/ERP Component Joshua A. 
Tabak, University of Washington; Vivian Zayas, Cornell University; and 
Warasinee  Chaisangmongkon,  Yale  University­  The  P300  event‐
related  brain  potential  (EEG/ERP)  is  arguably  the  most‐studied 
ERP  component,  and  is  widely  accepted  as  an  index  of  stimulus 
novelty or surprise, depending on the eliciting event.  Until now, the 
P300 has only been shown to be sensitive to differences in stimulus 
category  (e.g.,  circle  vs.  square;  man  vs.  woman)  of  which 
participants  are  consciously  aware.   Here,  we  show  that  the  P300 
component  of  the  ERP  waveform  provides  neurophysiological 
evidence  of  category  differentiation  among  social  stimuli  even 
when participants are not consciously aware that they are viewing 
stimuli  from  two  different  categories.   Sexual  orientation  can  be 
read  from  briefly  presented  faces  of  unknown  men  with  above‐
chance  accuracy  in  tasks  that  explicitly  instruct  participants  to 
make gay‐straight judgments (Tabak & Zayas, under review; Rule & 
Ambady, 2008).  We proposed that judgments of sexual orientation 
occur nonconsciously – i.e., in the absence of instructions to do so.  
To test this hypothesis, we recorded event‐related brain potentials 
(EEG/ERPs)  as  participants  performed  a  three‐stimulus  oddball 
task  (Jeon  &  Polich,  2001).   Participants  were  presented 
photographs of straight men (70% of targets), gay men (15%), and 
straight  women  (15%)  for  200  ms,  and  instructed  to  tap  the 
spacebar in response to women’s faces and to not respond to men’s 
faces.   Replicating  past  research  showing  that  infrequent  stimuli 
elicit  greater  P300  than  frequent  stimuli,  straight  women’s  faces 
elicited greater P300 (P3b) “context‐updating” ERP deflections than 
did  straight  men’s  faces.   Critically,  even  though  participants  were 
never asked to make a gay‐straight judgment, gay men’s faces also 
elicited larger P300 (P3a) deflections than did straight men’s faces.  
Neurophysiological  evidence  for  differentiation  of  the  categories 
“straight  men”  vs.  “gay  men”  was  also  found  in  the  N170,  P200, 
N100,  and  P100  ERP  components,  suggesting  that  nonconscious 
differentiation  of  complex  social  stimuli  (e.g.,  faces)  may  begin  in 
very  early  processing.   Stimulus‐bound  artifactual  explanations  of 
the results (e.g., group differences in photo luminance) were ruled‐
out, and no participant reported any suspicion that faces differed in 
sexual orientation during the funneled debriefing procedure.  These 
findings demonstrate that sexual orientation is inferred from faces 
even when individuals are not explicitly instructed to judge sexual 
orientation and raise questions about the common assumption that 
bias  cannot  occur  if  marginalized  identities,  such  as  sexual 
orientation,  are  not  explicitly  revealed.   Moreover,  these  results 
show  that  EEG/ERP  methodology  may  be  used  to  study  processes 
underlying nonconscious stimulus differentiation. 

j9
Ventromedial prefrontal damage reduces
interpersonal disgust- Elisa  Ciaramelli,  Centro  Studi  e 
Ricerche  di  Neuroscienze  Cognitive;  Rebecca  Sperotto,  Centro  Studi  e 
Ricerche di Neuroscienze Cognitive; and Giuseppe di Pellegrino, Centro 
Studi  e  Ricerche  di  Neuroscienze  Cognitive,  Universita’  di  Bologna­ 
Disgust  is  an  emotion  that  motivates  withdrawal  from  offensive 
stimuli (Rozin et al., 2000). Elicitors of disgust are manifold. Across 
cultures,  humans  experience  disgust  for  rotten  food,  and  animal 
and  body  products,  such  as  feces,  vomit  and  saliva  (i.e.,  core 
disgust).  Core  disgust  is  functional  to  food  selection  and  to  the 
protection  of  the  body  from  potentially  harmful  substances. 
Humans, however, also report feeling disgusted in situations where 
social  or  moral  boundaries  appear  to  be  violated.  For  example, 
disgust is reported when other demonstrate racism, hypocrisy, and 
unfairness  (i.e.  moral  disgust),  and  at  the  thought  of  unwanted 
intimacy with unsavory human beings, such as homeless people or 
drug addicts (i.e., interpersonal disgust) (Rozin et al., 2000; Harris 
& Fiske, 2006).One important question is whether the same neural 

j8
How your mood can change your mind:
Incidental affect imparts long-term changes
in economic decision making- Steven  J.  Stanton,  Duke 
University;  Crystal  C.  Reeck,  Duke  University;  Scott  A.  Huettel,  Duke 
University; Kevin S. LaBar, Duke University­ While anecdotal accounts 
of stock market swings and personal purchases often acknowledge 

 

[38] 

mechanisms  mediate  disgust  for  elicitors  from  different  domains 
(Schaich‐Borg  et  al.,  2008;  Chapman  et  al.,  2009).  Here,  we 
investigated  whether  the  ventromedial  prefrontal  cortex  (VMPFC) 
plays  a  crucial  role  in  mediating  emotional  reactions  of  disgust  to 
core,  interpersonal,  and  moral  elicitors.  Patients  with  lesions  in 
VMPFC (VMPFC patients), control patients with lesions outside the 
frontal lobe (non‐PFC patients) and healthy individuals considered 
vignettes requiring to decide whether or not to choose a behavioral 
option that elicited disgust but resulted in a material gain. Vignettes 
could elicit core disgust (e.g., whether to eat a pizza with some ants 
on it if you are starving), interpersonal disgust (e.g., whether to use 
the  sweater  of  a  drug  addict  if  you  are  cold),  moral  disgust  (e.g., 
whether  to  work  for  a  corrupted  politician  if  it  will  improve  your 
career).  For  comparison  purposes,  we  also  included  vignettes  that 
elicited anger (e.g., whether to sit beside a noisy person if that is the 
only free seat left). We found that VMPFC patients were more likely 
to  endorse  behavioral  options  eliciting  interpersonal  disgust  than 
non‐PFC patients and normal controls. In contrast, VMPFC behavior 
in scenarios eliciting core disgust, moral disgust, and anger was not 
different  from  that  of  the  controls.  These  results  indicate  that 
VMPFC patients had reduced sensitivity to interpersonal disgust, in 
the  face  of  retained  sensitivity  to  core  disgust,  moral  disgust,  and 
anger.  This  finding  suggests  that  disgust  is  not  a  unitary  emotion, 
and that the mechanisms responsible for mediating different types 
of disgust may differ. In particular, the VMPFC seems to be crucial 
to mediate interpersonal disgust, but not other aspects of disgust.  

the errors they make, resulting in improved performance on tasks 
of self‐control.  
j11
The Neural Correlates of Individuated
Judgments-Jennifer  Kubota,  New  York  University;  and  Tiffany  A. 
Ito,  University  of  Colorado  at  Boulder­  N200s  have  been 
conceptualized as reflecting deeper encoding of familiar stimuli. We 
hypothesized that this deeper encoding might serve as a precursor 
to more individuated processing. To assess the neural correlates of 
individuation,  participants  were  presented  with  photos  of  Black 
and  White  males  along  with  four  pieces  of  aggressive  or  non‐
aggressive  information  from  4  different  scenarios.  Participants 
judged the likelihood that the individual behaved aggressively in a 
fifth  scenario.  In  a  second  task,  participants  viewed  pictures  of 
different  Black  and  White  faces  while  ERPs  were  recorded.  We 
calculated the correlations between N200s and use of individuating 
information  (i.e.  use  of  the  four  pieces  of  aggressive  information 
given about each target) and use of race (i.e. use of visual category 
information  over  and  above  individuating  information)  in  the 
aggression  task.  Participants  relied  on  the  aggressive  information 
and reliance on this information did not differ for Black and White 
targets.  In  terms  of  ERPs,  at  the  mean  level  participants 
differentiated  targets  by  racial  category.    However,  the  more 
attention  that  was  paid  early  on,  as  indexed  by  overall  N200 
amplitudes,  the  more  individuals  relied  on  individuating 
information  for  both  Black  and  White  targets.    In  addition, 
individuals  who  explicitly  report  that  African  Americans  are  more 
aggressive  than  White  Americans  use  race  over  and  above 
individuating  information  and  this  effect  is  in  part  mediated  by 
ingroup favored encoding at the N200. These findings suggest that 
there  exists  a  relationship  between  N200s  (early  attention)  and 
individuation  and  that  this  effect  is  tempered  by  the  stereotypes 
brought  into  the  encounter.    Thus,  if  N200s  serve  a  catalytic 
function  in  individuation,  then  increasing  neural  encoding  to 
ougroup  members  at  the  N200  might  increase  individuation  of 
ougroup members who are typically individuated to a lesser degree 
than  ingroup  members.  Under  certain  circumstances,  impression 
formation  goals  can  alter  the  impressions  formed  of  outgroup 
targets. In a second study, deeper encoding of outgroup targets was 
encourage  by  use  of  a  perspective‐taking  manipulation.  In  this 
study,  participants  viewed  pictures  of  different  Black  and  White 
faces while ERPs were recorded.  Taking a first‐person perspective 
of  a  target  is  thought  to  trigger  referential  thought  and  should 
encourage greater perceived similarity.  For participants who wrote 
an  essay  in  the  first  person  about  a  Black  and  a  White  individual, 
there was no difference in attention to targets as a function of race 
at  the  N200.  For  participants  who  wrote  an  essay  in  the  third 
person  about  a  Black  and  a  White  individual,  participants 
differentiated  targets  by  racial  category  at  the  N200.  These  two 
studies  suggest  that  early  attention  that  occurs  within  200  ms  of 
viewing  a  person  relates  to  the  application  of  individualized 
information.  In  addition,  differentiation  by  racial  category  that  is 
typically  observed  at  these  early  ERP  components  can  be  changed 
through impression goal manipulations. 

j10
Mindful and aware: Meditation practice
increases neurophysiological response to
errors Rimma  Teper,  University  of  Toronto;  and  Michael  Inzlicht, 
University  of  Toronto­Eastern  cultures  have  long  emphasized  the 
importance  of  meditation  practice,  citing  its  numerous  benefits. 
Although the emergence of meditation practice in the Western was 
initially  met  with  skepticism  by  scientists  and  academics,  its 
growing  popularity  has  caused  psychologists  to  look  deeper.  This, 
in  turn  has  fuelled  numerous  studies  that  have  demonstrated  the 
various  positive  outcomes  of  meditation,  such  as  improved 
attentional control (Jha, Krompinger, & Baime, 2007), and reduced 
stress levels (Tang et al, 2007). Although several experiments have 
tried to pin down the biological processes underlying meditation, it 
seems as if a crucial piece of the neural puzzle is missing. The goal 
of  the  current  research  program  was  to  investigate  the  role  of the 
error‐related negativity (ERN) in meditation practice, and how this 
event‐related  potential  links  meditation  expertise  to  behavioural 
outcomes,  such  as  improved  self‐control.   The  ERN  has  been 
localized  to  the  anterior  cingulate  cortex,  a  brain  region  that  is 
responsible for executive control (Botvinick, Cohen & Carter, 2004), 
and  is  generally  thought  to  reflect  the  preconcious  monitoring  of 
errors  or  uncertainty  (Ridderinkhof,  Ulsperger,  Crone,  & 
Nieuwenhuis,  2004).  Specifically,  the  ERN  is  thought  to  reflect  an 
affective response to errors, and occurs approximately 100 ms after 
an error is made. Higher trait ERN has been linked to a higher GPA 
(Hirsh  &  Inzlicht,  2009),  and  better  Stroop  task  performance 
(Inzlicht & Gutsell, 2007). For the current study, meditators with at 
least  one  year  of  meditation  experience,  as  well  as  age‐matched 
controls  were  recruited  to  participate  in  an  electroencephalogram 
(EEG)  study.  All  participants  completed  a  colour‐naming  Stroop 
task  while  we  recorded  EEG  activity  in  the  ACC.  Meditators 
exhibited a higher ERN in response to errors on the Stroop task and 
actually made fewer errors than their non‐meditating counterparts. 
Further  analyses  revealed  that  the  amount  of  meditation 
experience,  as  well  as  number  hours  spent  meditating  per  week 
were  both  significantly  correlated  to  a  higher  ERN  in  response  to 
errors, even when controlling for level of education, and religiosity. 
These  results  suggest  that  meditators  are  better  able  to  attend  to 

 

j12
Neural Bases of Trust for Ingroup and
Outgroup Members- Katie  Rotella,  Northwestern  University; 
Jennifer  A.  Richeson,  Northwestern  University;  Jason  M.  Scimeca, 
Northwestern  University;  and  Joan  Y.  Chiao,  Northwestern  University‐ 
Much social psychological work has found that ingroup members are
favored over outgroup members, and accorded a greater degree of trust,
although these differences are often based in ingroup “love” rather than
outgroup “hate.” It is possible that group membership leads to
preconceived notions of how likely a partner is to reciprocate one’s

[39] 

contributor to the support‐health link stems from the giver.  

goodwill. Prior neuroimaging research has found greater activity in the
ventral striatum (VS) when learning whether or not to trust people of
high, low, or unknown moral character. By contrast, greater activity
within anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is observed when people chose
to trust partners perceived as of low relative to high moral character.
Here we examine the psychological and neural basis of economic trust
with religious ingroup and outgroup members, using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Twelve Jewish, male participants
played 24 rounds of an economic trust game with partners of Jewish,
Christian and unknown religious identity (control partner). Importantly,
each partner practiced a 50% reciprocation rate when participants chose
to trust. Before playing the economic game, participants rated each
partner as equally likely to play in a trustworthy manner, and following
play rated each partner as equally trustworthy. Indeed, although
participants accurately estimated that each partner had reciprocated to
an equal degree (and at the 50% rate), a repeated-measures ANOVA
revealed that participants trusted ingroup members significantly more
than outgroup and control partners. When deciding whether or not to
trust the outgroup (but not ingroup) partner, participants showed greater
ACC activation on trials in which they ultimately decided to trust (the
stereotype-inconsistent decision), suggesting that the decision to trust
outgroup members engenders more cognitive conflict, a further signal
that individuals are reluctant to trust the outgroup. After learning
whether the partner decided to reciprocate their trust or, rather, to
defect, differential activation was observed in the caudate nucleus (CN),
but, interestingly, only for the behavior of the ingroup partner. These
results suggest that although neural feedback mechanisms more
adequately track the trust behavior of ingroup members, it is cognitively
“easier” to trust such partners, and this may result in trust biases
favoring ingroup members. 

j14
Social Mentalizing and General Reasoning
have Little in Common- Frank  Van  Overwalle,  Vrije 
Universiteit Brussel‐ It has recently been suggested that brain areas 
crucial  for  mentalizing,  including  the  medial  prefrontal  cortex 
(mPFC), are not activated exclusively during mentalizing about the 
intentions,  beliefs,  morals  or  traits  of  the  self  or  others,  but  also 
more  generally  during  cognitive  reasoning  including  relational 
processing about objects. Contrary to this notion, a meta‐analysis of 
over  40  cognitive  reasoning  tasks  demonstrates  that  the  core 
mentalizing  areas  are  not  systematically  recruited  during 
reasoning,  but  mostly  when  these  tasks  describe  some  human 
agency or general evaluative and enduring traits about humans, and 
much  less  so  when  these  social  evaluations  are  absent.  There  is  a 
gradient  showing  less  mPFC  activation  as  less  mentalizing  content 
is  contained  in  the  stimulus  material  used  in  reasoning  tasks. 
Hence, it is more likely that cognitive reasoning activates the mPFC 
because inferences about social agency and mind are involved.  
j15
Social Reasoning in Psychopathy- Elsa  Ermer, 
University of New Mexico; and Kent A. Kiehl, University of New Mexico‐ 
Psychopaths  show  a  profound  lack  of  morality  and  behavioral 
controls  in  the  presence  of  intact  general  intellectual  functioning. 
Two hallmarks of psychopathy are the persistent violation of social 
contracts  (i.e.,  cheating)  and  chronic,  impulsive  risk‐taking.  These 
behaviors  present  a  puzzle:  can  psychopaths  understand  and 
reason  about  what  counts  as  cheating  or  risky  behavior  in  a 
particular situation? We tested incarcerated psychopaths and non‐
psychopaths  reasoning  about  conditional  rules  using  the  Wason 
selection  task.  Subjects  read  stories  describing  a  social  exchange, 
precautionary,  or  descriptive  rule  and  responded  yes  or  no  to 
whether  various  instances  were  possible  violations  of  that  rule. 
Consistent  with  hypotheses,  psychopaths,  compared  to  matched 
non‐psychopaths,  showed  significant  impairment  on  social 
exchange  and  precautionary  rules,  but  not  descriptive  rules. 
Incarcerated non‐psychopaths performance on social exchange and 
precautionary  rules  was  comparable  to  performance  in 
undergraduates.  These  results  cannot  be  accounted  for  by 
differences  in  intelligence,  motivation,  or  general  antisocial 
tendency.  These  findings  suggest  that  examination  of 
evolutionarily‐identified  reasoning  processes  can  be  a  fruitful 
research  approach  for  identifying  which  specific  mechanisms  are 
impaired in psychopathy.

j13
Neural Underpinnings of the Provision of
Social Support- Tristen K. Inagaki, University of California, Los 
Angeles; and Naomi I. Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles 
‐Although  research  has  demonstrated  a  robust  relationship 
between social support and improved health outcomes, most have 
assumed  that  these  benefits  stem  from  the  receiver  of  support. 
However, new research suggests that the act of giving support may 
be just as important as receiving support (Brown et al., 2003). Still, 
little  is  known  about  the  processes  associated  with  support  giving 
that contribute to beneficial health outcomes. One possibility is that 
giving support is both emotionally rewarding for the support giver 
and  reduces  the  giver’s  own  distress  from  knowing  another  is  in 
pain.  Based,  in  part,  on  work  displaying  activity  in  the  ventral 
striatum  (VS),  a  reward‐related  neural  region,  in  response  to 
voluntarily  giving  money  to  charity  (Moll  et  al.,  2006),  we 
hypothesized  that  support  giving  would  also  be  associated  with 
increased  VS  activity.  Additionally,  animal  research  suggests 
caregiving  type  behavior,  including  grooming  and  huddling  over 
newborns  dampens  activity  in  regions  associated  with  negative 
affect  and  threat  detection  (Wartella  et  al.,  2003)  and  this  pattern 
may  be  similar  for  humans  providing  support  to  others.    To  this 
end,  couples  were  recruited  to  participate  in  an  fMRI  session  in 
which the female partner underwent a scan while her partner stood 
just outside of the scanner and received unpleasant electric shocks. 
During  the  scan,  females  were  told  that  their  partners  were  about 
to  be  shocked  and  were  then  directed  to  either  hold  his  arm 
(support  giving)  or  to  hold  a  ball  (no  support‐giving).    In  two 
control conditions, females were told that her partner would not be 
receiving  any  shocks  and  were  asked  to  simply  hold  her  partner’s 
arm  (arm  alone)  or  hold  the  ball  (ball  alone).    ROI  analyses 
evidenced increased VS activity during support giving compared to 
not  support  giving  and  perhaps  surprisingly,  the  arm  alone 
condition.  Moreover, regions associated with negative, threatening 
stimuli showed decreased activity in support giving compared to no 
support.    These  results  highlight  the  uniquely  beneficial  nature  of 
providing  support  to  another  and  suggest  another  possible 

 

 

j16
Neural Correlates of Moral Judgment in
Adolescents and Adults- Carla  L.  Harenski,  The  MIND 
Research  Network;  Keith  A.  Harenski,  The  MIND  Research  Network; 
Matthew  Shane,  The  MIND  Research  Network;  and  Kent  A.  Kiehl,  The 
MIND  Research  Network‐The  neural  mechanisms  underlying  moral 
judgment  have  been  extensively  studied  in  healthy  adults.  How 
these mechanisms evolve from childhood to adulthood has received 
less attention. Brain regions that have been consistently implicated 
in moral judgment in adults, such as the prefrontal cortex, undergo 
extensive  developmental  changes  during  adolescence.  Thus,  their 
role in moral judgment may change from adolescence to adulthood. 
In the present study, 51 healthy male participants age 12‐53 were 
scanned  with  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI)  while 
they viewed pictures that did or did not depict actions considered 
by most individuals to be ‘morally wrong’, and rated their degree of 
moral  violation  severity.  Consistent  with  prior  studies,  adults  age 

[40] 

27  and  older  (N  =  15)  showed  greater  activity  in  ventromedial 
prefrontal  cortex,  temporo‐parietal  junction,  and  posterior 
cingulate  when  viewing  moral  vs.  non‐moral  pictures.  These 
activations  were  significantly  greater  in  the  adults  compared  to 
adolescents  age  18  and  younger  (N  =  15).  Adolescents  showed 
increased activity relative to adults in the caudal anterior cingulate. 
A  correlation  analysis  with  all  51  participants  showed  a  robust 
positive  correlation  between  age  and  activity  in  the  temporo‐
parietal  junction  during  the  evaluation  of  moral  pictures,  and  a 
negative correlation in the caudal anterior cingulate. These results 
suggest that brain regions utilized in moral judgment change across 
development. 

embarrassment losing in front of others than along with a computer 
or a greater sense of competition against people versus machines. 
j18
Reward Salience of Food Types during a
Categorical
Stroop
Task-A
preliminary
investigation-Gayathri  Pandey,  Columbia  University;  William 
Hinkle, Columbia University; Paul Trowbridge, Columbia University; and 
Joy  Hirsch,  Columbia  University‐  Food  choice  and  eating  behavior  in 
humans  are  not  merely  influenced  by  internal  states  to  maintain 
homeostasis,  but  are  also  driven  by  external  variables  such  as 
physical properties of food that can be rewarding. Palatability itself 
is  proportional  to  the  pleasure  experienced  when  eating  a 
particular  food.  In  comparison  to  low‐caloric,  high‐caloric  foods 
have been shown to be more rewarding, thus leading to these foods 
being  consumed  more  for  the  pleasure  value  they  impart  rather 
than  merely  for  nourishment.  The  influence  of  palatability  on 
appetite and food intake in humans has been investigated in several 
studies,  leading  to  conclusions  that  different  food  types  are 
processed  differently  in  the  brain.  The  present  study  aims  at 
understanding  the  effect  on  selective  attention  of  two  primary 
reward  categories:  high‐caloric  foods  (sweets)  and  low‐caloric 
foods (vegetables). Given the differential processing of high‐calorie 
and  low‐calorie  foods,  based  on  their  reward  salience,  this  study 
investigates the processing bias, if any, of such food types within a 
categorical  Stroop  paradigm.  The  study  employs  picture‐word 
compounds of the two food categories (‘sweets’ and ‘veggies’), with 
4‐food images/words from each category. An example of a category 
congruent picture‐word compound is a picture of a vegetable with 
the  name  of  another  vegetable  superimposed  on  the  image.  A 
category  incongruent  compound  example,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a 
vegetable image with a sweet desert‐likefood superimposed. There 
were two target conditions in this Stroop task. In the first condition, 
the  images  were  the  target  and  the  superimposed  words  were 
distracters  while  the  second  condition  reversed  target  and 
distracter.  Based  on  the  condition,  the  subject  had  to  categorize 
images/words  as  either  ‘sweets’  or  ‘veggies’.  The  experiment  was 
built  and  presented  using  Matlab/PsychToolBox.  Only  the 
behavioral  investigations  are  reported  here.    A  pilot  was  run  on  8 
healthy normals. Subjects were trained and then completed the two 
study  conditions  in  a  counter‐balance  order.  Reaction  times  were 
analyzed using a hierarchical regression model, within and between 
subjects,  for  (1)  a  target  condition  effect  (target  =  word  or  image) 
(2)  category  congruency  effect  and  (3)  reward  category  effect 
(sweets v. vegetables).  (1) Pilot results showed that the two target 
conditions differed significantly (P<.01) in their reaction times with 
image targets eliciting faster reaction times. (2) In the word target 
condition,  reaction  times  from  incongruent  stimuli  were 
significantly  slower  than  congruent  stimuli  (P<.01).    When  word 
was  the  target,  the  overall  mean  reaction  time  was  substantially 
slower  for  all  subjects.  (3)  In  the  word  target  condition,  reaction 
times  to  incongruent  sweet  distracter  images  were  slower  than  to 
the  vegetable  distracter  images,  though  this  difference  did  not 
reach  significance.  Final  results  will  be  reported  with  a  minimum 
sample  of  20  subjects.  If  selective  attention  is  a  natural 
phenomenon that occurs based on individual priorities, then trying 
to understand how preferred rewards may be instrumental in such 
an  adjustment  of  selective  attention  is  also  very  crucial.  Rewards 
drive  behavior  whether  they  are  internal  or  external. 
Understanding  how  external  food  rewards  influence  selective 
attention can help explain why some people find it difficult to avoid 
junk foods and struggle with obesity issues, while some are able to 
ward off these temptations. 

j17
It Hurts More Losing to another Person than
to a Machine- David  Liu,  University  of  California,  San  Diego 
People  think  and  reason  about  the  social  world  in  somewhat 
different ways than how they think and reason about the physical, 
mechanical  world.   There  are  dissociations  in  how  the  brain 
processes  social  versus  non‐social  information.   However,  what 
exactly  are  the  differences  between  social  and  non‐social 
cognition?  The domain specificity of social cognition is particularly 
striking in cases of individuals with autism spectrum disorder who 
are  world‐class  mathematicians  or  physicists  highly  skilled  at 
solving physical and mechanical problems, but fail at solving simple 
folk  psychological  problems  (Baron‐Cohen  et  al.,  1999).   What 
prevents  these  individuals  from  harnessing  their  physical  and 
mechanical  problem‐solving  skills  to  solve  folk  psychological 
problems? We propose that part of what differentiates social from 
non‐social cognition is that the affective stakes are much greater for 
cognition  in  the  social  context.   To  test  this  hypothesis,  we 
compared  participants'  neural  responses  in  matched  social  versus 
non‐social  conditions.   We  examined  participants'  error‐related 
negativity/feedback‐related negativity (ERN/FRN), a fronto‐central 
component  of  the  human  event‐related  brain  potential  (ERP) 
associated  with  detection  of  errors  or  with  feedback  stimuli 
indicating  negative  outcomes;  the  FRN  reflects  a 
monitor/evaluation  neural  system's  detection  of  negatively‐
valenced  events.   For  example,  Gehring  and  Willoughby  (2004) 
observed  a  negative  deflection  following  feedback  of  monetary 
loss.   In  the  current  study,  ERP  data  were  recorded  while 
participants  played  multiple  trials  of  a  competitive  game  (rock 
paper‐scissors)  on  the  computer  (gaining  money  on  win  trials, 
losing  money  on  lose  trials,  and  gaining/losing  nothing  on  tie 
trials).   On  half  of  the  trials,  the  participants  were  told  that  they 
were  playing  against  another  person  on  another  computer  next 
door, and on the other half of the trials, the participants were told 
that they were playing against the computer.  In reality, participants 
played  against  the  computer  in  both  conditions,  thus  completely 
controlling  away  any  differences  between  the  conditions,  other 
than the participants' belief that they were interacting with a social 
versus  non‐social  system.   We  predicted  that  we  would  observe 
larger  FRN  amplitude  in  the  person  condition  compared  to  the 
computer  condition.  That  is,  losing  to  a  person  produces a  greater 
negativity than losing the same monetary amount to the computer. 
We collected and analyzed ERP data from 17 adult participants.  All 
participants were right‐handed with normal or corrected‐to‐normal 
vision.   The  observed  FRN  to  the  loss  condition  compared  to  the 
gain  condition  was  observed  over  the  fronto‐central  scalp  region, 
following  previous  ERN/FRN  studies.   As  predicted,  the  amplitude 
of  the  FRN  was  significantly  greater  when  losing  in  the  person 
condition than when losing in the computer condition.  The results 
suggest  that  a  critical  difference  between  social  and  non‐social 
cognition  is  that  the  affective  stakes  are  greater  when  interacting 
with people and processing social information.  Further studies are 
needed  to  determine  why  the  affective  stakes  are  greater  when 
interacting  with  people.   Possibilities  include  greater  shame  and 

 

j19

[41] 

BD  II  depressed  subjects  and  control  subjects  using  an  fMRI  face 
matching  task  that  has  been  shown  to  engage  the  corticolimbic 
network  (Hariri  et  al.,  2000).    We  hypothesized  that,  relative  to 
controls,  BD  II  depressed  subjects  would  show  reduced  amygdala 
activity and heightened orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) activity, opposite 
to the direction found in mania. 3T fMRI data were collected for 17 
BD II depressed subjects (7F, age=36.0 ± 8.7) and 17 controls (7F, 
age=38.5  ±  9.7)  during  performance  of  an  emotionally  stimulating 
test  condition  (matching  affectively  charged  faces)  and  a  control 
condition (matching  geometric forms).    The  match  emotion  blocks 
were  contrasted  against  the  match  forms  blocks  within  groups, 
because  this  contrast  has  been  shown  to  reliably  activate  the 
amygdala  (Hariri et al., 2000; Altshuler et al., 2008).  Whole brain 
statistical analyses for within‐ and between‐group were carried out 
using FSL’s FEAT.  Functionally‐defined regions of interest (ROIs) in 
the right and left amygdala and in the right and left BA47 region of 
the  OFC  were  created  by  dilating  a  5mm  sphere  around  the 
maximally activated voxels from the random‐effects analyses in the 
control group.  For each subject, the time course from each ROI was 
extracted separately and used to calculate the mean percent signal 
change  using  FEATQuery.    Correlational  analyses  were  performed 
between  these  ROIs  and  clinical  measures  (e.g.,  HAMD  scores, 
illness  duration,  and  number  of  months  in  current  depressive 
episode).  Significant  bilateral  amygdala  and  bilateral  inferior 
frontal  cortex  (BA47)  activation  was  found  within  patient  and 
control groups during the match emotion condition.  Within‐group 
analyses  further  revealed  that  control  subjects  activated  other 
typical  emotion  and  face  processing  regions  including  bilateral 
fusiform  gyrus,  bilateral  medial  frontal  gyrus  (BA6),    cingulate, 
bilateral  parietal  regions  (BA40),  and  bilateral  hippocampus.  
Bipolar  depressed  subjects  activated  similar  regions  in  bilateral 
fusiform  gyrus,  left  MFG  (BA6),  right  BA40,  and  bilateral 
hippocampus  (z>2.3,  p<.05,  corrected).    Random  effects  between‐
group  analyses  revealed  a  significant  reduction  in  right  BA47  and 
bilateral  amygdala  in  BD  II  depressed  subjects  compared  to 
controls  (z>2.0,  p<.05,  corrected).    In  the  reverse  comparison,  we 
did  not  find  areas  of  significantly  greater  activation  in  BD  II 
depressed  subjects  relative  to  controls.    Furthermore,  we  did  not 
find  significant  associations  between  any  of  our  clinical  symptom 
severity measures and activations in the amygdala or BA47.  These 
findings  suggest  that  BD  II  depressed  subjects  exhibit  dysfunction 
of  the    frontolimbic  circuit,  a  network  of  regions  important  in 
emotion  processing  and  emotion    regulation.    While  the  reduction 
in amygdala activity observed in BD II depression is opposite to the 
direction  seen  in  mania  and  may  be  state‐dependent,  the 
hypoactivation  of  BA47  is  consistent  with  results  seen  in 
hypomania/mania and may represent a trait‐related finding.   

Is Obtaining a Reward Different from
Avoiding an Aversive Outcome? Separable
Effects of Stimulus and Outcome Evaluation
and their Interaction- Samantha  M.  Mowrer,  The  Ohio 
 
State  University;  Andrew  A.  Jahn,  The  Ohio  State  University; Amir  M. 
Abduljalil, The Ohio State University; and William A. Cunningham, The 
Ohio  State  University‐  Processing  and  evaluating  information  in 
one’s  environment  is  crucial  for  guiding  decisions  and  actions. 
Much research has been dedicated to decomposing various aspects 
of evaluation and determining how these sub‐processes are carried 
out at the neural level. The current literature suggests evaluations 
of stimuli and one’s actions with respect to these stimuli are carried 
out  in  distinct  areas  of  orbitofrontal  cortex  (OFC;  Cunningham, 
Kesek,  &  Mowrer,  2009).  Further,  the  area  of  OFC  representing 
outcomes  of  actions  does  so  in  a  stimulus‐independent  manner. 
That  is,  this  region  responds  generally  to  positive  outcomes,  both 
receiving  rewards  and  avoiding  punishments  (Kim,  Shimojo,  & 
O’Doherty, 2006).  Although the processing of stimuli and outcomes 
can  be  considered  independently,  we  investigated  whether 
representations  of  outcomes  could  also  be  dependent  on  the 
specific  type  of  outcome  received.  Might  additional,  more 
abstracted  processes  be  recruited  to  differentiate  receiving  a 
reward  versus  successfully  avoiding  a  punishment?  During  fMRI 
scanning,  participants  completed  a  task  in  which  they  could 
experience  gains,  losses,  non‐gains,  and  non‐losses.  Participants 
responded  with  a  specific  button  press  to  shapes  representing 
potential  gains  and  losses,  each  of  which  carried  successful  (i.e., 
gains  and  non‐losses)  or  unsuccessful  (i.e.,  losses  and  non‐gains) 
monetary  outcomes.  Consistent  with  previous  findings,  results 
showed  a  posterior  region  of  OFC  was  involved  in  stimulus 
evaluation,  showing  the  greatest  activation  to  potential  gains, 
whereas  an  anterior  region  of  OFC  was  involved  in  outcome 
evaluation,  differentiating  successful  and  unsuccessful  outcomes 
regardless  of  stimulus  type.  Thus,  distinct  regions  appear  to 
differentiate between potential and actual rewards. While posterior 
OFC may signal a potentially rewarding stimulus, anterior OFC may 
encode  any  rewarding  outcome.  Further,  the  stimulus  x  outcome 
interaction  revealed  that  an  anterior  portion  of  dorsal  anterior 
cingulate (ACC) responded to rewards and punishments in a more 
nuanced, stimulus‐dependent manner. This region responded with 
the greatest activity to successful gains, thus differentiating a very 
specific  type  of  success.  Although  some  neural  regions  such  as 
anterior  OFC  may  process  gains  and  non‐losses  similarly,  others 
such as dorsal ACC may not. This suggests that some neural regions 
may  simply  discriminate  between  rewards  and  non‐rewards, 
whereas other regions further differentiate this signal with respect 
to  particular  types  of  rewards.  Thus,  a  reward  can  be  experienced 
differently depending on the kind of reward it is. 

j21
j20

The effect of social exclusion on the
sensitivity to vocal tone: an ERP study Asuka 
Murata,  University  of  Michigan;  Sam  Boas,  University  of  Michigan; 
Sasha Kimel, University of Michigan; and Shinobu Kitayama, University 
of  Michigan‐  In  conversations,  vocal  tone  reveals  the  speaker’s 
relational  attitudes.  Perceiver  spontaneously  allocates  more 
attention to vocal tone, resulting in sensitivity to any incongruities 
between verbal contents and vocal tone. N400, which is one of ERP 
component  and  reflects  semantic  incongruity,  is  an  effective  brain 
index  to  examine  this  vocal  sensitivity  in  the  vocal  Stroop  task. 
Previous  research  has  shown  that  larger  N400  like  negative 
potential appeared when the word meaning was incongruous with 
the  background  vocal  tone,  relative  to  when  the  two  were 
congruous.  People  have  an  inherent  need  to  belong,  and  it  is 
theorized to be a need secondary only to those of health and safety. 
Accordingly,  social  exclusion  alters  our  emotional  and  cognitive 
states.  At  present,  however,  not  much  is  known  how  the  social 
exclusion  modulates  individuals’  vocal  sensitivity  to  incongruities 

Amygdala
and
Orbitofrontal
Cortex
Activation to Emotional Facial Expressions in
Bipolar II Depression- Nathalie  Vizueta,  University  of 
California, Los Angeles; Jennifer D. Townsend, University of California, 
Los  Angeles;  Teena  D.  Moody,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles; 
Jeffrey  Fischer,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  Salvatore  Torrisi, 
University of California, Los Angeles; Roxanne E. Vasquez, University of 
California, Los Angeles; Catherine Hegarty, University of California, Los 
Angeles;  Susan  Y.  Bookheimer,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles; 
Lori  L.  Altshuler,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles,  VA  Greater  Los 
Angeles Healthcare System‐  Bipolar II Disorder (BD II) is a sub‐type 
of  Bipolar  Disorder  in  which  abnormally  low  mood  states 
(depression)  create  significant  impairment,  while  at  least  one 
abnormally elevated mood episode (hypomania) is present but not 
severe  enough  to  cause  impairment.    Despite  the  associated 
morbidity,  BD  II  depression  remains  understudied.    Here,  we 
examined differences in neural activation between medication‐free 

 

[42] 

of  word  meaning  and  vocal  tone.  To  investigate  whether  the 
experience  of  social  exclusion  increases  or  decreases  vocal 
sensitivity,  we  examined  the  effect  of  social  exclusion  on  N400  in 
the  vocal  Stroop  task.  The  participants  went  through  a  cyber  ball 
paradigm  as  a  social  exclusion  manipulation.  In  the  cyber  ball 
paradigm, they were asked to complete a mental visualization task 
with  two  other  participants  via  the  internet.  In  reality,  these  two 
other  participants  were  computer‐generated  confederates  with 
names that were of the same gender as the participant, whose name 
also  appeared  on  the  screen.  Each  participant  was  randomly 
assigned  to  one  of  two  groups:  the  exclusion  group,  in  which 
participants received only a couple of throws at the beginning and 
none afterward, and the inclusion group, in which the participants 
received  one  third  of  the  throws.  Next,  all  participants  performed 
the  vocal  Stroop  task.  They  listened  to  two  blocks  of  the  same  32 
words,  half  of  which  are  pleasant  and  the  other  unpleasant.  Each 
word was presented in either a positive or negative vocal tone. The 
combination of word meaning and vocal tone then resulted in four 
distinct  types  of  stimuli:  positive  meaning‐positive  tone,  positive 
meaning‐negative  tone,  negative  meaning‐positive  tone,  and 
negative  meaning‐negative  tone.  The  participants  were  instructed 
to  judge  whether  the  meaning  of  the  word  was  pleasant  or 
unpleasant,  while  ignoring  vocal  tone.  As  a  result,  inclusion  group 
showed  larger  N400  to  incongruities  of  word  meaning  and  vocal 
tone. Comparatively, exclusion group did not show the incongruent 
effect  on  N400.  These  results  indicate  that  the  participants  in  the 
social  exclusion  group  showed  less  vocal  sensitivity  to  the 
incongruities  of  word  meaning  and  vocal  tone,  when  compared  to 
those  in  the  inclusion  group.  The  theories  of  emotional  numbing 
and cognitive concussion may best address our finding. The theory 
of emotional numbing suggests that events such as social rejection 
or  exclusion  may  lead  to  a  state  of  numbness,  both  physically  and 
emotionally. In addition, it is possible to explain the lack of N400 in 
the  exclusion  condition  as  simply  the  inability  to  process  complex 
stimuli, resulting in reduced processing. 

participants  who  declined  (M  =  3.80,  SD  =  .53;  and  M  =  3.38,  SD  = 
.70,  respectively),  F(1,  63)  =  5.67,  p  <  .03,  Cohen’s  d=  0.68. 
Additionally,  no  group  differences  were  observed  on  other 
personality  measures  including  interdependence,  promotion  or 
prevention focus, self‐consciousness, self‐esteem, or desire for self‐
consistency. The eligibility to participate in an fMRI study (based on 
health,  safety,  or  psychiatric  factors)  was  not  associated  with  any 
personality  measures.  Furthermore,  there  were  no  significant 
differences  in  willingness  or  eligibility  to  participate  based  on 
gender or ethnicity. These results suggest the existence of a robust 
sampling  bias  in  neuroimaging  research.  Because  independent 
social  orientation  is  known  to  be  associated  with  a  number  of 
psychological  characteristics  including  self‐concept,  mode  of 
thought,  attention,  and  motivation,  among  others,  far  more 
attention is called for to ensure the representativeness of research 
subjects in neuroimaging research.

j23
Emotion Recognition in Music and Basal
Ganglia Dysfunction: A Study of Parkinson’s
Disease- César  F.  Lima,  University  of  Porto,  Portugal;  Carolina 
Garrett, University of Porto, Portugal; and São Luís Castro, University of 
Porto,  Portugal- Neuroimaging  and  clinical  studies  suggest  that 
basal  ganglia  are  involved  in  emotion  recognition  abilities.  One 
important  source  of  evidence  comes  from  studies  of  Parkinson’s 
Disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disorder marked by a depletion 
of  dopaminergic  input  to  the  striatum.  PD  patients  show  impaired 
recognition  of  emotions  in  facial  expressions  and  in  speech 
prosody, but it is still unclear whether the impairment is observed 
across  all  modalities  and  emotions.  Music  is  a  powerful  tool  to 
investigate  emotion‐related  processes  –  it  is  capable  of 
communicating  diverse  emotional  qualities  and  of  eliciting  strong 
emotional  responses.  Are  basal  ganglia  part  of  the  neural  network 
subserving  emotion  recognition  in  music?  To  examine  this 
question,  we  tested  a  group  of  PD  patients  (N  =  15)  in  the  early 
stages  of  the  disease  (stages  I  to  III,  according  to  the  Hoehn  and 
Yahr  scale)  and  without  dementia,  as  assessed  by  the  Mini‐Mental 
State  Examination.  A  background  neuropsychological  evaluation 
was  conducted  covering  executive  functions,  working  memory, 
verbal intelligence, depression signs, and audiometric screening. In 
two experimental tasks, patients were presented with short music 
excerpts composed to express happiness, peacefulness, sadness and 
fear/threat (Vieillard et al., 2008). In the first task, they rated how 
much each music excerpt expressed each of the four emotions on 6‐
point intensity scales. In the second task, they performed a forced‐
choice emotion identification. Patients were also assessed for non‐
emotional  music  processing  abilities  with  the  scale,  rhythm  and 
meter tests of the Montreal Battery of Evaluation of Amusia (MBEA; 
Peretz,  Champod,  &  Hyde,  2003).  For  the  rating  task,  results 
revealed  that  patients  provided  higher  intensity  scores  to  the 
intended  than  to  the  non‐intended  emotions  of  the  excerpts. 
Performance on this task correlated with the scale and rhythm tests 
of  the  MBEA,  indicating  that  perceptuo‐cognitive  musical  abilities 
might  be  associated  with  the  perceived  intensity  of  musical 
emotions.  In  the  forced‐choice  task,  participants  were  able  to 
correctly  identify  the  four  emotions  well  above  the  chance‐level. 
Therefore,  basal  ganglia  dysfunction  does  not  preclude  the 
perception  of  musical  emotions.  In  order  to  determine  whether 
patients  exhibit  an  abnormal  performance,  they  will  be  compared 
with  a  group  of  healthy  controls  matched  for  age,  sex  and 
education. This study will contribute to better specify the functional 
role of basal ganglia for emotional processing, and to inform clinical 
approaches that use music as a rehabilitation device in PD.  

j22
Are Participants in Neuroimaging Research
More Independent? Steven Tompson, University of Michigan, 
Ann  Arbor;  Hannah  Faye  Chua,  University  of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor; 
Shihui  Han,  Peking  University;  and  Shinobu  Kitayama,  University  of 
Michigan,  Ann  Arbor‐  Sample  sizes  in  neuroimaging  research  are 
typically  small,  which  can  pose  serious  interpretive  problems 
unless  there  is  reasonable  assurance  of  the  representativeness  of 
research subjects who are recruited. On the basis of recent cultural 
psychological  work  that  indicates  independent  social  orientation 
significantly  influences  preference  for  high‐risk/high‐return 
activities, we hypothesized that there will be a systematic sampling 
bias  such  that  independently‐oriented  individuals  are  more  likely 
to participate in an fMRI experiment, inasmuch as fMRI research is 
viewed as relatively  unknown and riskier than most other research 
but  also  as  typically  providing  higher  payouts  than  behavioral 
research—thus high‐risk/high‐return. In the present work, we used 
fliers  to  recruit  participants  (all  Americans  who  were  born  in  and 
grew up in the United States) for a study on “personality and music 
preferences.” During the subject recruitment no mention was made 
of neuroimaging. After completing personality questionnaires in the 
study,  including  an  independent  social  orientation  measure, 
participants  were  told  that  there  would  be  a  second  part  to  the 
study and they had the option to participate in the second part. The 
second  part  would  take  place  on  a  later  date  and  involve  an  fMRI 
scan.  Participants  would  earn  $12  for  the  initial  session  and  were 
offered an additional $30 for participating in the fMRI portion of the 
study.  Overall,  80%  of  the  65  participants  who  participated  in  the 
initial  study  session  agreed  to  participate  in  the  fMRI  study.  As 
expected,  the  participants  who  agreed  to  participate  in  the  fMRI 
portion  of  the  study  were  significantly  more  independent  than 

 

[43] 

task. The magnitude of the ERN is known to increase as a function 
of  the  motivational  significance  of  an  error.  Because  when  people 
are  exposed  to  human  faces,  they  may  categorize  their  decision  to 
be public, under other’s scrutiny, we predicted that the ERN would 
be strong after the face priming for Asians, whereas the ERN would 
be  weak  after  the  face  priming  for  European  Americans. 
Furthermore,  previous  work  suggests  that  stimuli  presented 
subliminally  can  have  a  considerable  influence  on  some  basic 
psychological  processes.  Building  on  this  literature,  we  further 
predicted  that  perception  of  social  eyes  can  be  accomplished 
without  conscious  awareness  even  when  the  faces  are  presented 
subliminally.  Twelve  Asians  and  sixteen  European  Americans 
performed  a  flanker  task  while  the  EEG  was  recorded  with  64 
BioSemi  active  electrodes.  Throughout  the  task,  participants  were 
presented  with  sets  of  five  arrowheads  and  instructed  to  respond 
with the left or right hand according to the direction of the center 
arrow.  We  used  backward  masking  to  present  priming  images 
subliminally.  Each  trial  began  with  a  brief  presentation  (16ms)  of 
either  a  face  or  a  house  image,  and  a  mask  stimulus  was  followed 
immediately afterward. Then, the target arrows appeared. The EEG 
recordings  for  correct  and  incorrect  responses  were  averaged 
separately  for  CRN  (correct‐response  negativity)  and  ERN.  To 
control for any extraneous effects of priming on both ERN and CRN, 
we analyzed the relative magnitude of ERN (vs. CRN). As predicted, 
the  relative  ERN  was  larger  in  the  face  priming  trials  than  in  the 
house  trials  for  Asians  whereas  the  pattern  was  non‐significantly 
reversed for European Americans. The interaction between culture 
and  priming  was  significant.  Moreover,  the  ERNs  in  the  face 
priming  trials  were  reliably  predicted  by  participants’  perceptions 
of  social  orientation  (i.e.,  interdependence  vs.  independence)  of 
people around them. Participants who perceived that most of their 
fellows  are interdependent showed larger  relative  ERN  in  the  face 
trials than in the house trials compared to those who perceived that 
their  cultural  members  are  less  interdependent.  These  results  are 
discussed in terms of culture and brain interaction.  

j24
The Influence of Group Membership on Advice
Taking-  Mirre  Stallen,  Erasmus  University  Rotterdam,  Radboud 
 
University  Nijmegen  ;Ale  Smidts, Erasmus  University  Rotterdam;  and 
Alan  Sanfe,  Radboud  University  Nijmegen‐  When  making  a  decision, 
people often look to others for advice. At work, for example, people 
are  likely  to  consult  their  colleagues  when  solving  a  difficult  task. 
Similarly, at home people may well ask their peers or parents about 
their  opinions  before  making  an  important  decision.  Interestingly 
however,  advice  is  not  always  used.  Even  when  the  advice  in 
question is valuable people sometimes decide to ignore it. To date, 
there is little knowledge on what factors influence advice use. The 
aim  of  this  study  was  to  investigate  how  the  social  relationship 
between an advisor and a decision‐maker affects advice use. More 
specifically,  we  examined  whether  the  sense  of  belonging  to  a 
particular  group  influenced  the  acceptance  of  advice.  Are  people 
more  willing  to  accept  advice  when  given  by  an  in‐group  member 
instead  of  an  out‐group  member?  And,  if  so,  what  neural 
mechanism is underlying the susceptibility to advice from in‐group 
members?  To  answer  these  questions,  we  conducted  a  behavioral 
(n=35)  and  an  fMRI  study  (n=19)  with  the  same  experimental 
paradigm.  At  the  start  of  the  experiment,  participants  were 
categorized  as  members  of  a  group  on  the  basis  of  a  trivial 
performance  criterion.  Thereafter,  participants  took  part  in  a 
decision task in which they viewed an array of dots, ranging from 5 
to 30, randomly displayed on a screen for 1500 milliseconds. Their 
goal  was  to  simply  estimate  the  number  of  dots  as  accurately  as 
possible. However, before indicating their response, the estimation 
of  another  participant,  the  “advisor”,  was  shown.  This  advisor 
either  belonged  to  the  same  group  as  the  participant  (in‐group 
advisor)  or  to  a  different  group  (out‐group  advisor).  Unknown  to 
the participants, the advice was predetermined so that advice was 
similar  for  in‐group  and  out‐group  advisors.  Results  of  the 
behavioral  study  demonstrated  that  advice  use  was  influenced  by 
the  group  identity  of  the  advisor.  Participants  followed  the  advice 
more often when the advisor was an in‐group member than when 
the advisor was an out‐group member. In the imaging experiment, 
however, we did not find this behavioral effect, but we did see that 
advice coming from an in‐group advisor was processed differently 
than  advice  of  an  out‐group  advisor.  Exposure  to  in‐group  advice 
resulted in an increase in activity in the medial orbitofrontal cortex, 
caudate  and  occipital  cortex,  suggesting  that,  even  when  advice  is 
not used, advice of a group member is processed as more favorable 
and  more  salient  than  advice  given  by  an  advisor  who  has  no 
shared identity.  

j26
Emotional awareness and verbal memory are
positively
associated
in
healthy
older
adults­  J.J  Hartman,  University  of  Iowa;  J.S.  Yuska,  University  of 
Iowa; D. Tranel, University of Iowa; S. Paradiso, University of Iowa; N.L. 
Denberg,  University  of  Iowa­    Awareness  of  one’s  own  and  others’ 
emotional  experiences  is  critical  to  adaptive  social  functioning.    In 
late  life  an  open  question  concerns  the  extent  to  which  emotional 
awareness  is  related  to  cognitive  functioning.  Here,  awareness  of 
self  and  others’  emotional  experience  was  examined  in  relation  to 
cognitive  ability  as  a  proxy  for  brain  health.  Seventy  community‐
dwelling  older  volunteers  negative  to  neurological  and  psychiatric 
screening  (56%  female,  mean  age  =  73.8  years,  SD  =  9.0;  range  = 
60‐95  years;  mean  education  =  16.0  years,  SD  =  2.7;  Performance 
IQ=  115.9;  Verbal  IQ  =  117.4)  completed  the  Levels  of  Emotional 
Awareness  Scale  (LEAS;  Lane  et  al.,  1990),  a  performance  task  in 
which  participants  provide  verbal  descriptions  of  their  own 
anticipated  feelings  and  those  of  another  person  for  differing 
scenarios.    Each  response  is  scored  for  emotional  complexity  (i.e., 
use  of  emotional  terms  to  describe  the  emotional  reactions  of  self 
and  other  in  the  scenario),  and  higher  scores  reflect  stronger 
emotional  knowledge  and  emotional  awareness.    Participants  also 
completed  a  comprehensive  battery  of  norm‐referenced 
neuropsychological measures assessing multiple cognitive domains 
(attention/working  memory,  anterograde  memory,  language, 
visuospatial,  and  executive  functioning).    LEAS  performance  was 
examined for associations with age, sex, and cognitive functioning.  
Neither age (r = –.15, p > .05) nor sex were significantly related to 
LEAS  performance  (t  =  –.72,  p  >  .05).    LEAS  performance  was 
directly  associated  to  a  measure  of  anterograde  verbal  memory 
(Rey Auditory‐Verbal Learning Test’s 30‐minute delayed recall: r = 

j25
Subliminal face priming modulates ERN in
culture-specific ways- Jiyoung  Park,  University  of 
Michigan;  Emre  Demiralp,  University  of  Michigan;  William  J.  Gehring, 
University of Michigan; and Shinobu Kitayama, University of Michigan‐ 
Previous  work  suggests  that  decisions  made  in  private  (in  the 
absence of social eyes) or in public (in the presence of social eyes) 
have  varying  motivational  significance  depending  on  cultural 
backgrounds of participants. It has been suggested that individuals 
with  independent  selves  (e.g.,  European  Americans)  invest 
themselves  on  decisions  that  are  made  in  private  because  the 
private  decision  is  perceived  as  expressive  of  the  personal  self. 
However, individuals with interdependent selves (e.g., East Asians) 
invest  themselves  on  decisions  that  are  witnessed  by  others 
because the public decision can implicate public aspects of the self 
such  as  the  self’s  social  reputation.  Currently,  however,  little  is 
known on brain mechanisms underlying this cultural difference. To 
investigate neural mechanisms underlying this effect, we examined 
the error‐related negativity (ERN), an event‐related brain potential 
that  is  observed  when  an  error  is  made  in  a  choice  reaction  time 

 

[44] 

.44, p < .0001).  There were no significant relationships between the 
LEAS  and  other  domains  of  cognitive  functioning.  Among  older 
volunteers  with  high  cognitive  and  daily  functioning,  emotional 
awareness did not correlate with age and was not associated with 
sex.    In  spite  of  the  narrow  age  range  (not  including  young  and 
mature  adults),  a  significant  association  between  emotional 
awareness and anterograde memory was found, indicating perhaps 
that  individuals  with  more  intact  memory  systems  rely  on  better 
systems  for  verbally  processing  emotions.  Future  studies  may 
examine the extent to which emotional awareness may protect the 
aging  of  the  brain,  especially  regions  that  are  vulnerable  to 
interpersonal  stress,  such  as  the  hippocampus  and  other  medial 
temporal lobe structures (Gold & Chrousos, 1999).   

j28
WAVES OF REGRET: A MEG STUDY OF EMOTION AND
DECISION-MAKING­  Cinzia  Giorgetta,  University  of  Trento; 
Alessandro Grecucci, University of Trento; Nicolao Bonini, University of 
Trento;  Giorgio  Coricelli,  University  of  Trento,  University  of  Lyon, 
France;  Gianpaolo  Demarchi,  University  of  Trento;  Cristhoph  Braun, 
University  of  Trento;  Alan  G.  Sanfey,  University  of  Trento,  Radboud 
University Nijmegen, University of Arizona‐ Recent fMRI studies (e.g., 
Coricelli  et  al.,  2005;  Chua  et  al.,  2009)  have  investigated  brain 
activity  involved  in  the  role  of  regret  while  playing  a  standard 
gambling task, with these studies showing that the dorsal anterior 
cingulate cortex, medial OFC and anterior hippocampus (Coricelli et 
al.,  2005)  all  contribute  to  the  experience  of  regret.  In  these 
experiments  gambles  with  different  values  and  probabilities  were 
used,  and  regret  was  studied  by  manipulating  the  feedback  the 
subject saw: full‐feedback (regret: where subject sees the outcomes 
from  both  the  chosen  and  unchosen  gamble)  vs.  partial‐feedback 
(disappointment: where subject only sees the outcome from chosen 
gamble). However, an alternate conceptualization of regret is that it 
is  characterized  by  the  feeling  of  responsibility  for  the  negative 
choice outcome (Gilovich & Melvec, 1994), whereas disappointment 
is related to external responsibility for choice outcome (Frijda et al., 
1989).Therefore,  in  this  experiment  we  tested  this  hypothesis  by 
disentangling  regret  from  disappointment  by  manipulating  the 
responsibility  for  the  choice:  in  one  condition  choice  was  made 
directly by subjects themselves  (regret), and in the other the choice 
was made by a computer (disappointment).  In both cases, we used 
a full feedback design. In the task, 16 participants played a total of 
480  trials  each  while  undergoing  whole  head  magneto‐
encephalography (MEG). On each trial one option had smaller, safer 
outcomes,  with  the  other  offering  larger,  riskier  outcomes.  After 
making their choice, subjects saw the outcomes (either gain or loss) 
from chosen and unchosen options in two separate time windows. 
The  combination  of  responsibility  and  outcome  resulted  in  four 
conditions:  regret  (human‐loss),  disappointment  (computer‐loss), 
rejoice  (human‐win)  and  elation  (computer‐win).  Event  related 
fields  (ERF)  were  measured  using  an  Elekta  Neuromag 
Vectorview® MEG scanner (306 channels).  Data were sampled at a 
rate  of  1kHz,  and  subsequently  analyzed  with  SPM8  MEG  toolbox. 
The baseline was removed using the average activity in the  ‐100 – 
0  ms  time  window.  Furthermore,  data  were  bandpass  filtered    in 
the  frequency  range  of  2  to  10  Hz.  Eyeblinks  were  detected  by 
visual inspection and trials containing eye artifacts were discarded. 
Grand  averages  across  subjects  were  computed  and  compared 
between different conditions. ERF waveforms presented a stronger 
M150 for regret relative to disappointment, with negative magnetic 
field  amplitudes  at  sensors  located  over  left  temporal  regions  and 
corresponding  positive  over  right  temporal  regions  stronger.  This 
component  was  followed  by  a  characteristic  polarity  reversal. 
Source  imaging  localized  the  corresponding  differential  evoked 
potential  (regret  vs.  disappointment)  over  the  temporal‐parietal 
region  at  maximum  peak  of  169ms.  ERF  waveforms  presented  a 
similar  pattern  between  regret  and  rejoice,  being  stronger  for 
regret. Source reconstruction localized the differential activity over 
right occipital and left temporo‐polar regions with a maximum peak 
at 140ms.The present study extends the accumulating evidence for 
neural  activity  in  processing  regret  in  gambling  tasks  by  using 
magneto‐encephalography in this context for the first time. It shows 
also evidence that regret may be neurally differentiated from other 
emotions (disappointment and rejoice), with assessment of evoked 
magnetic fields determining two separate differential activities and 
localizations. 
 
j29

 
j27
Trait anxiety mediates emotion’s effects on
attention and perception  ‐  Emma  Ferneyhough,  New 
York  University;  Damian  A.  Stanley,  California  Institute  of  Technology; 
Elizabeth  A.  Phelps,  New  York  University;  and  Marisa  Carrasco,  New 
York  University­  Anxiety  modulates  the  capture  of  attention  by 
emotion,  prolonging  reaction  time  to  detect  a  probe.  What  has  yet 
to  be  shown  is  whether  anxiety  may  also  modulate  perceptual 
abilities.  Previously  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  emotion 
potentiates  the  benefit  of  attention  on  low‐level  perceptual 
performance  (e.g.,  contrast  sensitivity).  Here  we  investigated 
whether: 1) there is a corresponding cost of emotion and attention 
on  contrast  sensitivity;  and  2)  anxiety  modulates  this  perceptual 
cost.  45  naïve  observers  participated  in  the  study.    Non‐predictive 
precues directed exogenous (involuntary) attention to a visual task 
stimulus.  On  each  trial,  precues  were  grayscale  faces  with  either 
neutral or fearful expressions and were presented to the left, right, 
or both sides of central fixation (3.5x4.6°, 8° eccentricity) for 80 ms. 
After a 53 ms inter‐stimulus interval, a target (3x3°, 1.5 cpd Gabor 
patch, 4° eccentricity) was displayed on one randomly‐selected side 
and  a  distracter  was  presented  on  the  other  side  for  40  ms. 
Exogenous  attention  was  thus  randomly  cued  toward  the  target 
(valid  cue),  distracter  (invalid  cue),  or  distributed  over  both 
locations,  yielding  a  total  of  six  conditions  (2  types  of  precue  *  3 
validity  conditions).  Observers  had  2  s  to  discriminate  the  target’s 
orientation  (6°  left  or  right  from  vertical).        Stimulus  contrast 
varied  in  7  log  steps,  chosen  individually  per  observer  to  equate 
task difficulty.  Thus, there was a total of 672 trials, or 16 trials per 
data  point,  per  observer.    For  each  of  the  six  conditions,  a 
psychometric curve was fit to the performance data as a function of 
stimulus contrast.  Contrast sensitivity was defined as the contrast 
required  to  get  67%  correct  on  the  task,  and  compared  across 
emotion  and  attention  conditions.  After  the  experiment,  observers 
completed  self‐reported  measures  of  state‐  and  trait‐anxiety 
(PANAS, STAI).  We found that emotion significantly interacted with 
attention  in  a  manner  that  reflected  trait‐  but  not  state‐anxiety.  
Consistent  with  previous  research,  distributed‐fear  cues 
significantly  improved  sensitivity  compared  to  distributed‐neutral 
cues.  Although  valid‐  and  invalid‐fear  cues  did  not  consistently 
modulate  sensitivity  across  observers,  individual  differences  in 
anxiety  had  a  significant  negative  correlation  with  the  effect  of 
invalid  emotional  precues  (fear  minus  neutral  sensitivity).  
Increased  anxiety  was  associated  with  a  greater  emotion‐induced 
cost,  consistent  with  previous  probe  detection  tasks  showing  that 
highly  anxious  individuals  are  impaired  at  disengaging  their 
attention  from  threatening  stimuli.  Interestingly,  only  female 
observers  showed  both  benefits  and  costs  of  emotion,  consistent 
with sex differences in facial expression recognition and prevalence 
of  anxiety  disorders  in  the  general  population.  Overall,  our  results 
provide  further  evidence  that  attention  capture  by  an  emotional 
stimulus is mediated by anxiety, and this modulation can be see at 
the level of perception. 

 

Neural substrates of empathy for ‘social
pain’ and subsequent prosocial behavior- Carrie 

[45] 

Masten,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  Sylvia  A.  Morelli, 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  and  Naomi  I.  Eisenberger, 
University of California, Los Angeles­ Empathy is widely considered to 
be  a  foundation  of  human  social  experience,  and  decades  of 
research has emphasized empathy’s role as a catalyst for prosocial 
behavior.  Surprisingly,  however,  neuroimaging  research  on 
empathy  has  not  examined  empathy  for  others’  social  experiences 
or the neural processes through which empathy results in prosocial 
actions. In fact, most of the neuroimaging research on empathy has 
focused  on  empathy  for  physical  pain  rather  than  empathy  for 
negative  social  experiences  (e.g.,  Singer,  2006),  even  though 
observing  negative  social  experiences  is  likely  to  be  a  more 
frequent  occurrence.  In  the  current  study,  we  used  functional 
magnetic  resonance  (fMRI)  to  identify  neural  regions  involved  in 
empathy  for  a  negative  social  experience—social  exclusion—and 
examined  how  neural  activity  in  these  regions  predicted 
individuals’  subsequent  prosocial  behavior  toward  the  victim  of 
this  exclusion.  Eighteen  participants  were  scanned  while  they 
observed  a  staged  social  interaction,  in  which  one  person  was 
excluded  by  two  others  during  an  online  ball‐tossing  game. 
Following  the  scan,  participants  sent  emails  to  each  of  these 
‘people’ that they had observed, and a group of raters assessed how 
prosocial (e.g., helpful, comforting) the emails were to the excluded 
victim  compared  to  the  non‐victims.  In  addition,  participants  self‐
reported  their  levels  of  trait  empathy.  As  a  whole,  findings 
indicated  that  the  neural  regions  supporting  empathy  for  social 
pain  may  differ  from  those  previously  linked  with  empathy  for 
physical  pain  (see  Singer,  2006).  Specifically,  observing  exclusion 
(vs.  inclusion)  activated  regions  associated  with  mentalizing  (e.g., 
dorsomedial  prefrontal  cortex,  medial  prefrontal  cortex, 
precuneus),  and  only  highly  empathic  individuals  activated  both 
mentalizing  regions  and  social  pain‐related  regions  (e.g.,  anterior 
insula,  dorsal  anterior  cingulate  cortex).  One  possibility  is  that 
observing physical pain triggers an automatic, spontaneous distress 
response in most people, whereas observing social exclusion might 
require  mentalizing  to  understand  the  situation  and  imagine  the 
victim’s  pain.  Thus,  observing  social  exclusion  might  only  elicit 
pain‐related  neural  activity  among  highly  empathic 
individuals. Follow‐up region of interest analyses further indicated 
that  activity  in  two  of  these  regions  found  to  be  associated  with 
trait empathy—the anterior insula and the medial prefrontal cortex 
(MPFC)—predicted  subsequent  prosocial  behavior  toward  the 
excluded  victim,  and  activity  in  the  medial  prefrontal  cortex  in 
particular  mediated  the  link  between  trait  empathy  and  prosocial 
behavior.  Given  the  MPFC’s  known  involvement  in  self‐related 
processing  (e.g.,  Mitchell  et  al.,  2006),  it  is  possible  that  thinking 
about  how  observed  others  are  similar  to  oneself  is  an  important 
aspect of empathy that promotes increases in prosocial behavior.  
In  sum,  the  current  study  provides  an  important  first  step  toward 
understanding  individual’s  experiences  of  empathy  for  negative 
social  treatment  and  why  certain  individuals  make  efforts  to  help 
and  support  the  victims  of  these  negative  social  encounters. 
Understanding  the  neural  links  between  empathic  experience  and 
efforts  to  help  those  in  need  may  explain  the  adaptive  role  that 
empathy serves in promoting positive interactions with others. 

declarative memory and thus the hippocampus are required for the 
formation, maintenance, and updating of relational representations 
that shape our perceptions of events and the people that participate 
in  them  (Eichenbaum  and  Cohen,  2001;  Cohen  and  Banich,  2003), 
here we tested the role of the hippocampus in social judgments. In 
the  current  study,  we  assessed  the  ability  of  patients  with 
hippocampal amnesia (n=5) to integrate different pieces of socially‐
valenced information about the action of an individual even within 
a  single  trial.    In  each  trial,  the  amnesics  were  presented  with  a 
headshot  of  an  individual  and  instructed  to  make  initial  ratings 
about  the  individual’s  attributes,  including  the  individual’s 
perceived  moral  character  and  trustworthiness.    All  ratings  were 
made  on  a  7‐point  Likert  scale  (e.g.  to  the  question  “How  morally 
GOOD or BAD do you think this person is?” the scale was anchored 
from  1=very  bad  to  7=very  good).    Then,  the  amnesics  were 
presented with a (neutral) action shot of the individual with either 
a  positive,  negative,  or  neutral  narration  of  the  event.    In  one 
condition,  a  filled  delay  was  imposed  to  disrupt  the  amnesics’ 
declarative  memory  for  the  action  of  the  individual,  while  in  the 
other  condition  no  delay  was  imposed.    Next,  the  amnesics  were 
presented  with  the  original  headshot  of  the  individual  and  made 
final  ratings  on  the  same  scales.    Finally,  there  were  recall  and 
recognition  memory  probes  evaluating  the  amnesics’  memory  for 
the  action  of  the  individual  at  the  time  of  the  final  ratings.    We 
predicted  that  even  across  the  events  of  a  single  trial,  declarative 
memory about the action of the individual would be critical for the 
amnesics’  final  ratings  of  the  individual.    That  is,  only  when 
amnesics  retained  declarative  memory  for  the  action  of  the 
individual would their final ratings reflect the valence of the action 
performed  by  the  individual.  The  results  revealed  that  amnesics’ 
final  ratings  were  indeed  associated  with  declarative  memory  for 
the  action  of  the  individual.  Only  when  amnesics  had  declarative 
memory  for  the  action  as  having  been  positive  vs.  negative  vs. 
neutral  did  their  final  ratings  of  the  individual’s  attributes  change 
accordingly. Strikingly, the amnesics made exaggerated final ratings 
relative  to  matched  comparison  participants  (i.e.  more  positive  or 
more  negative,  depending  on  the  valance  of  the  action)  when  the 
amnesics’ memory for the action of the individual was comparable 
to  comparison  participants.  These  data  suggest  that  the 
hippocampus  and  declarative  memory  are  required  to  integrate 
information  necessary  to  evaluate  the  attributes  of  an  individual 
and make appropriate social judgments. 
j31
The task-dependent impact of race on early
face processing: An ERP study‐  Keith  B.  Senholzi, 
University  of  Colorado  at  Boulder;  and  Tiffany  A.  Ito,  University  of 
Colorado  at  Boulder­  The  N170  ERP  component  reliably 
differentiates  between  face  and  non‐facestimuli,  but  it  is  unclear 
whether  the  processing  indexed  by  thiscomponent  is  sensitive  to 
differences  among  faces.  Some  previous  studies  suggest  that  early 
stages  of  face  processing  are  insensitive  to  the  race  of  perceived 
faces, whereas others show that race‐of‐face can differentially affect 
processing.  Of  importance,  the  tasks  in  these  past  studies  were 
variable. To examine these disparate findings, ERPs were recorded 
while  participants  viewed  Black  faces,  White  faces,  and  butterflies 
and were required to pay particular attention to the race or identity 
of  faces,  or  make  face  versus  non‐face  judgments.  Task  affected 
N170 sensitivity to race. The N170 was larger for White faces than 
Black  faces,  but  only  for  participants  who  made  racial 
categorizations. 
Alternatively, the N170 was larger for Black faces than White faces, 
but only for participants who attended to the unique identity of the 
faces.  These  findings  suggest  that  race‐of‐face  can  differentially 
impact  face  processing  at  early  stages  of  encoding,  but  only  when 
race or identity is specifically attended to by individuals. 

j30
Hippocampal damage distorts the updating of
character judgments­  Rachael  D.  Rubin,  University  of 
Illinois; Melissa C. Duff, University of Iowa; Daniel Tranel, University of 
Iowa;  Neal  J.  Cohen,  University  of  Illinois­  As  we  learn  new 
information  about  other  people,  we  form  and  update 
representations  of  their  character  that  can  profoundly  influence 
how we regard and act towards them.  The question of what kind(s) 
of memory play(s) a critical role in this kind of social processing has 
received  surprisingly  little  study.    On  the  hypothesis  that 

 

[46] 

possible  that  the  disparity  may  also  be  due  to  chronic  stress 
associated  with  experiences  with  racial  and  ethnic  discrimination. 
The current study examined the biological pathways through which 
discrimination  might  affect  health.  We  focused  on  adrenal 
hormones  and  proinflammatory  cytokines  because  of  their 
involvement  in  the  physiological  stress  response  and  immune 
function. Our sample consisted of young adult to middle‐aged Black 
and Latina women in the New York City community. We found that 
higher  perceptions  of  ethnic  and  racial  discrimination  in  society 
were  related  to  greater  perceived  stress.  Additionally,  we  found 
that  perceived  discrimination  was  negatively  related  to  salivary 
DHEA and positively associated with levels of interleukin‐6, beyond 
effects  of  self‐reported  stress.  DHEA  has  been  linked  to  a  healthy 
stress  profile  and  interleukin‐6  is  activated  in  response  to 
inflammation  and  fever  response  to  infection.  These  findings 
illuminate  the  endocrine  and  immune  pathways  through  which 
discrimination‐stress  relate  to  racial  and  ethnic  disparities  in 
health. 

j32
Fronto-parietal theta synchronizations for
perspective takings from self-view to otherview- Masahiro  Kawasaki,  Rhythm‐based  Brain  Computation  Unit, 
 
RIKEN  BSI‐TOYOTA  Collaboration  Center;  and   Yoko  Yamaguchi, 
Rhythm‐based  Brain  Computation  Unit,  RIKEN  BSI‐TOYOTA 
Collaboration  Center,  Laboratory  for  Dynamics  of  Emergent 
Intelligence,  RIKEN  Brain  Science  Institute‐ Perspective  taking,  which 
requires  us  to  switch  the  self  perspective  into  someone’s 
perspective,  plays  an  important  role  on  social  communications, 
such  as  understanding  and  predicting  her  behavior  and  intention. 
This  ability  is  supposed  to  be  processed  by  well‐known  human 
mirror  neuron  system  which  is  associated  with  the  imitation, 
mentalizing, and empathy. However, it is not clear how the mental 
representation  from  the  self  view  point  is  mirrored  to  the 
transformed representation from the other view point. To address 
the issue, we focused on the laterality of the visual processing, for 
example,  a  right  visual  stimulus  is  processed  by  the  left  visual 
cortices,  and  analyzed  the  electroencephalogram  (EEG)  data  from 
14  healthy  right‐handed  subjects  during  the  viewpoint  switching 
task. This task simultaneously presented a white arrow pointing to 
one  of  six  directions  (three  upward  directions  as  “self‐view” 
conditions  and  three  downward  directions  as  “other‐view” 
conditions)  and  a  red  circle  at  one  of  six  positions  in  a  computer 
display, and then asked the subjects to judge whether the circle was 
right or left relative to the arrow. Behavioral performance showed 
the lower accuracy rates (99.0% for the self‐view and 96.0% for the 
other‐view  conditions)  and  the  longer  reaction  times  (0.75  sec  for 
the self‐view and 0.89 sec for the other‐view conditions) under the 
other‐view conditions to one position than the self‐view conditions 
to  the  same  position.  These  results  indicated  the  additional 
demands on switching from self to other perspective. To investigate 
the brain dynamics for the view point switching, we conducted the 
wavelet  analyses  for  the  EEG  data,  by  using  the  Morlet  mother 
wavelets.  The  contra‐lateral  parietal  theta  activity  (4‐6  Hz) 
increased  in  the  self‐view  condition  and  the  control  condition 
which  required  the  subjects  to  merely  see  the  visual  stimulus  but 
not  judging  whether  right  or  left  (e.g.  right  parietal  theta 
amplitudes increased during the left visual stimulus). These results 
are  consistent  with  the  previous  findings  about  the  visual 
processing laterality. Interestingly, in the other‐view condition, the 
additional  theta  activity  increased  in  the  ipsi‐lateral  parietal  and 
frontal  areas  after  the  contra‐lateral  parietal  theta  activity 
appeared.  And  further,  the  phase  synchronization  analyses 
identifying  the  inter‐cortical  connections  showed  the  significant 
theta  synchronizations  between  the  frontal  and  the  ipsi‐lateral 
parietal areas under the other‐view condition but not the self‐view 
condition  and  the  control  condition.  These  results  suggested  that 
the  mental  representation  from  the  self  view  point  in  the  contra‐
lateral parietal cortex would be projected to the ipsi‐lateral parietal 
cortex  in  case  of  the  other  view  point  as  if  the  subjects  see  the 
target  from  the  other  person.  And  the  viewpoint  switching  would 
be  executed  by  the  theta  network  dynamically  connecting  the 
frontal  and  parietal  areas.  The  present  study  would  provide  new 
neurological  evidences  about  the  mirroring  systems  of  the  basic 
human communication.  

j34
Specificity of the pSTS response to human and
animal biological motion-  Martha  D.  Kaiser,  Yale 
University; Maggie Shiffrar, Rutgers University; Kevin A. Pelphrey, Yale 
University‐  Researchers  often  refer  to  human  motion  as  biological 
motion.  However,  biological  motion  does  not  exclusively  suggest 
human  motion.  Typical  adult  observers  demonstrate  enhanced 
sensitivity  to  human  movement  compared  to  animal  movement. 
Yet, the neural underpinnings of this effect are unknown. The right 
posterior  superior  temporal  sulcus  (pSTS)  is  a  critical  region  for 
processing  biological  motion.  In  this  study  we  examine  pSTS 
activation  during  the  perception  of  human  and  animal  movement. 
This is the first study to use fMRI to examine the visual perception 
of veridical human motion and animal motion. We sought to clarify 
the  brain  mechanisms  for  the  perception  of  biological  motion. 
During  an  fMRI  scan,  typical  adults  viewed  point‐light  displays  of 
human, dog and tractor motions created from motion capture data. 
As predicted, observers exhibited significant activation of the right 
pSTS during the perception of biological motion compared to object 
motion. A conjunction analysis of human > tractor and dog > tractor 
revealed  regions  of  activation  including  areas  of  the  pSTS  (K>34, 
p<.05).  Further  analysis  of  this  region  of  interest  revealed  a 
differential response to distinct types of biological motion. That is, 
the  pSTS  exhibited  a  graded  response  where  activation  was 
significantly greater for human motion than dog motion, relative to 
tractor  motion.  This  specificity  of  the  neural  response  to  human 
motion  has  implications  for  understanding  development  of  the 
social brain and its role in disorders such as autism. 
j35
The neural correlates of perceiving life in a
face: A multivoxel pattern analysis‐  Christine  E. 
Looser, Dartmouth College; J. Swaroop Guntupalli, Dartmouth College; 
Thalia Wheatley, Dartmouth College‐ Interest in the human face has 
spurred  thousands  of  years  of  manmade  depictions  (e.g., 
sculptures).  These  depictions  have  become  increasingly  realistic 
and  yet  are  rarely  perceived  as  alive.   This  suggests  that  face 
perception is tuned along at least two dimensions: form ‐‐whether a 
face recognizably looks like a person, and animacy ‐‐whether a face 
looks alive. Converging evidence suggests that a network of areas is 
sensitive  to  faces,  yet  the  relative  contribution  of  these  areas  to 
identifying  human  form  versus  animacy  is  unclear.  The  present 
study  aimed  to  clarify  these  contributions.    We  recorded  BOLD 
responses  for  30  subjects  with  a  3T  fMRI  scanner  while  they 
passively  viewed  images  of  human  faces,  inanimate  human  faces 
(dolls), animal faces (dogs), inanimate animal faces (stuffed animal 
dogs).  Importantly,  these  categories  can  be  compared  in  terms  of 

j33
Effects
of
Perceived
Discrimination
on
Endocrine and Immune System Activity­  Kyle  G. 
Ratner, New York University; May Ling Halim, New York University; and 
David  M.  Amodio,  New  York  University‐  Epidemiological  studies 
reveal  that  African  and  Latino  Americans  are  at  greater  risk  for 
stress‐related health problems than White Americans.Although this 
disparity  is  typically  attributed  to  socioeconomic  status,  difficulty 
accessing  health  care,  and  other  societal  disadvantages,  it  is 

 

[47] 

their  animacy  (alive;  not  alive)  or  visual  similarity  (human  form; 
dog form). Subjects also viewed pictures of clocks, which served as 
a  control  object  category  (neither  living  nor  animate  form).  We 
performed  a  whole  brain  ANOVA  to  define  regions  of  interest 
(ROIs)  that  had  greater  responses  to  all  face  categories  relative  to 
clocks.  Of  particular  interest  were  the  lateral  fusiform  gyrus 
(fusiform  face  area:  FFA),  the  superior  temporal  sulcus  (STS)  and 
the inferior occipital gyrus (IOG), which make up the core network 
for face perception (Haxby et al. 2007).  These three ROIs (FFA, STS 
and IOG) were then interrogated with multivariate pattern analyses 
to  measure  the  multi‐dimensional  similarity  structure  of  neural 
representations.  These  analyses  revealed  that  hemodynamic 
response  patterns  in  IOG  clustered  by  form:  responses  to  humans 
were  similar  to  dolls  and  responses  to  real  dogs  were  similar  to 
stuffed  dogs.    In  contrast,  response  patterns  in  the  STS  and  FFA 
clustered  by  animacy:    responses  to  humans  were  similar  to  real 
dogs  and  responses  to  stuffed  dogs  were  similar  to  dolls.    This 
suggests that representations in IOG are based primarily on visual 
similarity  whereas  the  representations  in  STS  and  FFA  may  be 
based primarily on conceptual similarity, prioritizing animacy over 
form.  A face can be processed as a visual object and as the emblem 
of another life. Here we used MVPA to dissociate the organizational 
priorities  of  face‐sensitive  regions  along  these  two  dimensions 
(form, animacy). The organizational schema delineated in this study 
suggests  distinct  roles  within  the  face  perception  network  in  the 
service of identifying animate agents.  

used was the R parahippocampal/amygdalar region. The angry PPI 
identified  7  inferior/middle  frontal,  parietal,  and  cingulate  target 
regions  where  SMDs  had  decreased  connectivity  with  the  seed 
region vs. BD and controls. In contrast, the neutral PPI identified 4 
target regions in superior and medial frontal areas where SMD had 
increased connectivity with the seed region vs. BD and controls. In 
this  affective  priming  task,  awareness  of  angry  and  neutral  faces 
differentially affects parahippocampal/amygdala activation in SMD 
vs.  BD  and  controls.  SMD  show  increased  activation  for  A  vs.  NA, 
whereas  BD  and  controls  demonstrate  the  opposite  pattern.  PPI 
analyses  for  angry  and  neutral  faces  indicate  that  SMD  have 
different  connectivity  patterns  from  both  BD  and  controls.  These 
data  indicate  that  conscious  processes  are  not  essential  to  elicit 
deficits  in  emotional  face  processing  in  SMD.  Further  research 
should  explore  the  role  that  deficits  in  bottom‐up  processing  of 
emotional  stimuli  and  amygdalar  connectivity  may  play  in  the 
severe, chronic irritability characteristic of SMD. 
j37
Neural predictors of romantic decisionmaking‐  Jeffrey  C.  Cooper,  Trinity  College  Dublin;  Simon  Dunne, 
Trinity  College  Dublin;  Mary  Teresa  Furey,  Trinity  College  Dublin;  and 
John  P.  O‘Doherty,  Trinity  College  Dublin,  California  Institute  of 
Technology‐  The  decision  to  pursue  or  reject  a  potential  romantic 
partner  is  both  highly  motivated  and  highly  consequential,  but 
predicting  individual  romantic  decisions  remains  notoriously 
difficult.  For  example,  stated  ideal‐mate  preferences  have  little 
predictive  power  for  real‐life  romantic  decisions  in  the  moment. 
However,  individuals  in  many  domains  are  often  able  to  make 
accurate  social  judgments  based  on  limited  information  about  a 
partner, even just a photograph. To examine how these rapid social 
judgments  are  computed  in  the  brain  during  romantic  decision‐
making,  we  used  a  paradigm  in  which  heterosexual  volunteers 
underwent  real  interactions  with  a  large  number  of  potential 
partners  through  a  speed‐dating  forum.  151  individuals 
participated 
in 
speed‐dating 
events 
with 
15‐22 
members of each sex, in which each participant met every opposite‐
sex  participant  for  a  five‐minute  "date"  and  made  a  "Yes"  or  "No" 
decision  about  whether  they  would  want  to  see  that  date  partner 
again. After the events, pairs of participants who gave each other a 
Yes were given each other's contact information. Before the events 
(1‐9  days),  a  subset  of  these  individuals  (20  men  and  18  women) 
were  scanned  with  event‐related  FMRI.  During  scanning,  each 
participant saw photos of each of his future date partners and made 
a first‐impression rating of romantic potential. Activation in several 
regions  during  photo  viewing  predicted  participants'  subsequent 
 "Yes" or "No" decisions, including both regions sensitive to reward 
(such as ventral medial prefrontal cortex and ventral striatum) and 
regions  implicated  in  "mentalizing"  and  empathy  (such  as  rostral 
medial  prefrontal  cortex  and  posterior  superior  temporal  sulcus). 
Importantly, the predictive power of the latter set of regions were 
independent of the partner's subjective physical attractiveness. The 
results  are  consistent  with  the  idea  that  rapidly‐formed  first 
impressions  can  be  be  accurate  predictors  of  consequential 
decisions,  and  that  these  first  impressions  may  include  social 
judgments  of  personality  and  desirability  beyond  physical 
attraction. 

j36
Neural circuitry of implicit emotional face
processing in youth with bipolar disorder,
severe mood dysregulation, and controls‐ 
Laura  A.  Thomas,  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health;  Brian  L.  Bones, 
National  Institute  of  Mental  Health;  Gang  Chen,  National  Institute  of 
Mental Health; Daniel S. Pine, National Institute of Mental Health; Ellen 
Leibenluft,  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health­  Youth  with  bipolar 
disorder  (BD)  and  severe,  non‐episodic  irritability  (severe  mood 
dysregulation,  SMD)  show  deficits  in  explicit  labeling  of  facial 
emotion. However, emotional faces are also processed at an implicit 
level,  so  it  is  important  to  determine  whether  the  groups  differ  in 
neural activity during nonconscious face processing. We compared 
whole  brain  activation  in  BD,  SMD,  and  controls  during 
performance  of  a  backwards  masking  affective  priming  paradigm. 
Sixty‐three  youths,  including  20  BD,  21  SMD,  and  22  controls 
participated in this 3T fMRI study. In each condition, aware (A) and 
nonaware (NA), subjects indicated how much they liked an abstract 
shape (3000ms). In A, a face or blank oval was presented before the 
shape (187ms). In NA, a face or blank oval (17ms) was followed by 
a  scrambled  face  mask  (170ms),  then  the  abstract  shape.  The 
emotions  were  angry,  fearful,  happy,  and  neutral,  presented 
randomly.  Only  one  cluster  survived  correction  for  Group  (3)  x 
Emotion 
(5) 
x 
Awareness 
(2); 
in 
the 
right 
parahippocampus/amygdala.  In  order  to  elucidate  what  was 
driving  this  3  way  interaction  we  extracted  mean  signal  in  this 
region  and  ran  further  statistical  analyses.  There  was  a  Group  x 
Awareness  interaction  when  shapes  were  preceded  by  angry  or 
neutral  faces.  For  angry  faces,  between‐group  ANOVAs  revealed  a 
significant group effect in NA, with BD > SMD and a trend for HV > 
SMD. Within‐group paired t‐tests showed controls had significantly 
greater activation in NA vs. A. In contrast, SMD tended to have more 
activation  in  A  vs.  NA.  The  significant  Group  x  Awareness 
interaction  to  shapes  following  a  neutral  face  followed  a  pattern 
similar  to  that  following  an  angry  face.  Between‐groups  ANOVAs 
revealed a main effect of group in NA, driven by BD > SMD. Within‐
group  paired  t‐tests  showed  SMD  had  more  activation  in  A  vs. 
NA.Two  exploratory  psycho‐physiological  interaction  analyses 
(PPIs)  were  conducted,  one  for  angry  and  one  for  neutral, 
comparing  functional  connectivity  for  A  vs.  NA.  The  seed  region 

 

j38
Emotional experience following left basal
ganglia stroke is mediated by severity of
depression and is associated with limbic
neurofunctional alterations­  Kate  Ostedgaard, 
University  of  Iowa  Carver  College  of  Medicine;  Jatin  G.  Vaidya, 
University  of  Iowa  Carver  College  of  Medicine;  Beth  Anderson,  Olin 
Neuropsychiatry Research Center; Sergio Paradiso, University of Iowa 

[48] 

Carver College of Medicine­ Basal ganglia damage affects emotional 
and motivational processes, including perception and experience of 
disgust  and  reward.    Left  basal  ganglia  (LBG)  stroke  also  confers 
high  risk  of  depression.    Therefore,  changes  in  emotion  following 
LBG  stroke  may  be  secondary  to  depression.    In  addition,  beyond 
the  localized  tissue  loss  in  the  stroke‐damaged  area,  altered 
functioning  in  distant  emotion  processing  regions  may  further 
contribute to emotional changes.  This study examined the extent to 
which  changes  in  emotion  processing  following  LBG  lesion  can  be 
exclusively  attributed  to  localized  stroke  damage  by  examining 
emotional responses to affect‐evoking challenges in relationship to 
1) severity of depression, and 2) activity changes in regions distant 
from  the  damaged  area.  Emotion‐evoking  (frightening,  happy  or 
neutral)  facial  expressions  were  shown  to  6  subjects  with  LBG 
lesions and 12 subjects of comparable age and sex without history 
of  brain  damage  or  psychiatric  conditions  while  regional  brain 
activity  was  recorded  using  positron  emission  tomography  (PET) 
and the [15O]water method.  Subjects were instructed to allow the 
stimuli  to  affect  their  emotional  state  and  to  report  how  strongly 
they experienced the following basic emotions: fear, disgust, anger, 
amusement  and  happiness.    Affective  responses  were  also 
compared  to  5  subjects  with  depression  and  lesions  elsewhere 
including the right middle cerebral artery territory and cerebellum.  
Associations  between  emotion  ratings  and  depression  severity 
were also examined.  Whereas all subjects were able to perceive the 
valence  of  the  stimuli  appropriately,  LBG  patients  experienced 
significantly  lower  emotions  in  response  to  frightening  [U=14.5, 
p=0.039]  and  happy  [U=13.5,  p=0.033]  stimuli  compared  to  non‐
lesion  subjects.    LBG  subjects  exhibited  relative  decreases  in 
activity in the contralateral fusiform gyrus and frontal‐polar region 
in response to negative stimuli as well as in the posterior cingulate 
cortex (bilaterally) in response to positive stimuli.  Lower activity in 
the  cerebellum  and  primary  and  association  visual  cortices  was 
found  irrespective  of  stimulus  valence.    Interestingly,  there  were 
also  regions  of  increased  activity  contralateral  to  the  lesion  side 
irrespective  of  valence  (entorhinal  cortex)  or  in  response  to 
positive  (anterior  cingulate  cortex,  insula  and  frontal  regions)  and 
negative  stimuli  alone  (posterior  cingulate  cortex).    As  expected, 
severity  of  depression  was  significantly  higher  among  lesion 
subjects  (HamD  LBG  =16  ±  6.8,  comparison=3.75  ±  2.7;  U=4.5, 
p=0.003). Therefore, LBG subjects were compared to subjects with 
depression and lesions elsewhere (HamD=24.2 ± 6.3).  There were 
no  significant  group  effects  on  emotion  response.    Analyses 
including  all  subjects  (n=23)  showed  that  intensity  of  pleasant 
emotional  experience  inversely  correlated  with  severity  of 
depression (happy rho=‐0.45, p=0.017; amused rho=‐0.45, p=0.017; 
overall  arousal  rho=‐0.35,  p=0.05).  LBG  damage  is  associated  with 
overall  blunted  emotional  experience  that  cannot  be  directly 
attributed  to  reduced  hedonic  perception.    In  addition  to  being  a 
consequence  of  direct  tissue  damage  to  basal  ganglia  and  related 
reward networks, alterations in pleasant emotional experience may 
be mediated by severity of depression.  Increased activity in limbic 
structures  may  result  from  compensatory  mechanisms  albeit 
insufficient to elicit normative emotional responses. 

different means that people can use to regulate their emotions, the 
strategy of reappraisal is one of the most well‐studied. Reappraisal 
is  capable  of  lowering  emotional  experience,  reducing  or  altering 
psychophysiological  activity,  and  improving  social  functioning 
(Gross, 2002; Gross & John, 2003; Ochsner, Bunge, Gross, & Gabrieli, 
2002).  Our  group  has  recently  demonstrated  an  effect  of 
reappraisal as compared to suppression on a test of social decision‐
making, the Ultimatum Game (van’t Wout, Chang, & Sanfey, 2010), 
where  responders  accepted  more  unfair  offers  when  instructed  to 
reappraise  their  emotions.  However,  the  question  of  how  emotion 
regulation  strategies  affect  our  actual  decision‐making  abilities 
remains  largely  unanswered.  In  this  study,  we  investigated  the 
effect  of  both  up  and  down  emotional  reappraisal  (following 
Ochsner, Ray, Cooper, Robertson, Chopra, Gabrieli, and Gross 2007) 
on  social  decision‐making  in  the  Ultimatum  Game.  After  being 
trained on how to use this strategy, in a test phase 21 participants 
demonstrated  the  ability  to  both  up  and  down  regulate  their 
emotions,  compared  to  a  baseline  ‘look’  strategy,  while  viewing 
unpleasant  IAPS  pictures,  as  measured  by  valence  and  arousal 
mean  ratings.  In  the  experimental  phase,  participants  played  the 
Ultimatum  game  during  fMRI  while  applying  the  strategies  of  up‐
regulation,  down‐regulation  as  well  as  a  baseline  ‘look’  condition. 
As  hypothesized,  participants  accepted  more  unfair  offers  while 
down‐regulating, and also rejected more offers while up‐regulating, 
relative  to  the  baseline  condition.  The  acceptance  rate  for  the  fair 
offers was not modulated by the strategy, suggesting that emotional 
regulation was selective for the unpleasant emotions elicited by the 
unequal  offers.  At  the  neural  level,  the  effect  of  strategy 
demonstrated  significant  activations  of  the  middle  frontal  gyrus 
bilaterally, together with the right cingulate gyrus (involved in the 
decision  process),  the  right  insula  (which  codes  the  aversive 
reaction  to  the  unfair  offer),  the  inferior  parietal  lobe  bilaterally 
(implied  in  quantity  evaluation)  and  the  fusiform  gyrus  bilaterally 
(coding  the  faces  of  the  players).  Importantly,  the  insula  showed 
modulation of the BOLD signal for unfair offers: less activation for 
down‐regulation  and  more  activation  for  up‐regulation.  The 
interaction  between  strategy  and  offer  (fair  vs  unfair)  showed 
activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, possibly involved in 
coding and recoding the values according to the reappraisal. These 
results  support  and  extend  previous  findings  that  reappraisal  is  a 
powerful  emotion  regulation  strategy  that  influences  and  changes 
how  we  interact  with  others  even  in  the  face  of  inequity. 
Additionally,  the  study  further  clarifies  some  key  regions  involved 
in the emotional regulation of our decisions processes. 
j40
Mu suppression and interaction in social
context­ Ying Wu, Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, 
Center for Research in Language; and Scott Makeig, Swartz Center for 
Computational  Neuroscience‐  This  study  is  part  of  a  larger  ongoing 
project  investigating  distributed  brain  dynamics  associated  with 
competitive,  collaborative,  and  individual  activity  during  learning.  
The  present  analysis  will  focus  on  mu  rhythms,  which  are 
electroencephalographic  (EEG)  oscillations  with  spectral  peaks 
between  around  8‐13  Hz  and  22  Hz,  typically  detected  over 
somatomotor cortex.  Mu suppression is the phenomenon whereby 
mu rhythms are attenuated during preparation for and execution of 
movement.    Mu  is  also  suppressed,  though  not  necessarily  to  the 
same  degree,  when  an  individual  merely  observes  an  action  being 
performed  (by  somebody  else)  in  the  absence  of  any  overt 
movement  on  the  observer’s  part.  The  present  study  explores 
whether  mu  suppression  is  modulated  by  social  context  –  that  is, 
whether  mu  response  to  performing  and  observing  the  same  type 
of  action  changes  as  a  function  of  the  participants’  competitive  or 
collaborative  goals.    High  density  EEG  (133  channels  per  subject) 
was  recorded  simultaneously  from  pairs  of  healthy  adults  as  they 
played  a  computerized  version  of  the  card  game,  “Concentration,” 

j39
Emotional regulation in social decisionmaking: behavioral and neural evidence- 
Alessandro  Grecucci,  University  of  Trento;  Cinzia  Giorgetta,  University 
of Trento; Mascha van’t Wout, Radboud University Nijmegen; Nicolao 
Bonini,  University  of  Trento;  Alan  G.  Sanfey,  University  of  Trento, 
Radboud  University  Nijmegen,  University  of  Arizona­  The  ability  to 
successfully  regulate  our  emotions  is  a  necessary  skill  for 
navigating  our  daily  social  interactions.  Emotion  regulation  refers 
to the means by which ‘‘individuals influence which emotions they 
have, when they have them, and how they experience and express 
these  emotions’’  (cf.  Gross,  1999).  Although  there  are  many 

 

[49] 

which involves finding matching pairs of hidden values by touching 
a  card  image  in  a  grid  displayed  on  a  touch‐sensitive  computer 
screen.    Players  participated  in  four  types  of  games:  they  either 
competed  against  each  other,  collaborated  as  a  team  against  a 
computerized  agent,  or  played  individually  against  the  computer.  
EEG  time‐series  data  were  submitted  to  independent  component 
analysis  (ICA).    Trials  were  extracted  from  continuous  IC 
activations time‐locked to the release of a button that players were 
required  to  press  before  reaching  toward  the  screen  to  select  a 
card.    Equivalent  dipoles  were  modeled  of  all  ICs  that  exhibited 
spectral peaks at 10 Hz and 22 Hz, revealing three IC clusters – one 
over right and over left somatomotor cortex, respectively, as well as 
a  third  cluster  over  posterior  and  occipital  cortex.    Right  and  left 
somatomotor  clusters  revealed  substantial  desynchronization 
within the mu frequency bands just before and during each player’s 
release  of  the  button  and  reach  toward  the  touch  screen.    Mu 
suppression also occurred to a lesser extent and with a later onset 
when  each  player’s  partner  executed  a  turn.    Mu  suppression  to 
observed turns was stronger during competitive games (when both 
players  took  turns  alternately)  than  solo  ones  (when  one  player 
simply  observed  his  or  her  partner  playing).    In  the  case  of  the 
posterior cluster, desynchronized activity could be observed across 
a  fairly  broad  spectral  range  from  4  to  22  Hz.    For  self‐initiated 
turns,  this  desynchronization  becomes  apparent  from 
approximately  10  to  200  ms  after  the  release  of  the  button.    For 
observed  turns,  it  becomes  apparent  approximately  500  ms  after 
the button release.   Results indicate that in the context of playing a 
game, action processing is impacted by the participants’ interactive 
goals.  

participants  were  forced  to  upset  the  player  for  no  reason 
(Mandatory  Override)  and  (2)  when  participants  upset  the  player 
to  earn  the  player  a  long­term  benefit  (Voluntary  Override).    We 
used  reaction  time  for  the  override  button  press  as  an  index  of 
conflict.  We  pulled  parameter  estimates  of  activity  in  the 
comparison of the two override conditions in anatomically defined 
regions  of  interest  (ROI)  in  right  and  left  VLPFC  and  posterior 
DMPFC.    The  parameter  estimates  for  the  three  ROIs  were  each 
significantly  correlated  with  the  reaction  time  measure  suggesting 
that  greater  conflict  prior  to  an  override  decision  was  associated 
with  greater  activity  in  these  regions.    No  relationship  was 
observed between this conflict index and activity in dACC or insula.  
These  results  suggest  that  a  broader  conception  of  empathic 
responding  in  which  the  other’s  long‐term  needs  are  taken  into 
account  may  require  linking  to  neurocognitive  models  of  emotion 
regulation.  
j42
Hit the child or bend the woman’s finger? The
roles of Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex
and Dorsal Anterior Cingulate in Prosocial
and Antisocial Moral Decision Making- Henry  H. 
Yu, National Institute of Mental Health; Karina Blair, National Institute 
of Mental Health; and R.J.R. Blair, National Institute of Mental Health‐ 
Ventromedial  prefrontal  cortex  (vmPFC)  and  dorsal  anterior 
cingulated  cortices  (dACC)  have  been  long  been  associated  with 
reward‐based  decision  making  though  their  specific  functional 
roles  have  been  debated.    Moreover,  both  systems  have  been 
implicated  in  moral  judgment.    According  to  one  view,  vmPFC  is 
critical for representing reinforcement value but is not involved in 
the selection between responses options while dACC is involved in 
the  selection  between  response  options  but  does  not  specifically 
represent  reward  value.    The  current  study  considers  the 
implications of this view for the understanding of the contributions 
of  vmPFC  and  dACC  in  moral  judgment  using  a  novel  moral 
judgment paradigm.  In this event related fMRI paradigm, subjects 
are  asked  to  make  choose  between  having  to  do  one  of  two 
desirable  actions  or  one  of  two  undesirable  actions.    Response 
choice  difficulty  is  manipulated  by  varying  the  value  differences 
between  the  to  be  chosen  between  options;  it  is  easier  to  choose 
between options that differ greatly in value (e.g., “slapping another 
person’s  face”  vs  “cutting  off  another’s  person’s  head”)  relative  to 
choosing  between  options  that  differ  less  in  value  (e.g.,  “slapping 
another person’s face” vs. “punching another person’s shoulder” or 
“cutting  off  another’s  person’s  head”  vs.  “slicing  another  person’s 
eye open”).  In short, 20 healthy adults participated in a 2 (response 
choice: choosing between prosocial vs. choosing between antisocial 
actions) x 3 (value difference level: close, medium or far) design.  In 
line  with  predictions,  activity  in  vmPFC  varied  as  a  function  of 
value;  the  more  prosocial  or  the  less  antisocial  the  action,  the 
greater  the  BOLD  response  within  this  region.    Activity  within 
dmPFC  varied  as  a  function  of  value  difference  level;  it  was 
significantly  greater  for  more  difficult  choices  than  less  difficult 
choices.    These  data  suggest  that  vmPFC  and  dACC  have  specific 
roles in moral judgment, particularly with respect to action choice. 

j41
The Neural Correlates of Making Long-Term
Choices for Others- Sylvia A. Morelli, University of California, 
Los  Angeles;Austin  Grinberg,,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles; 
Kenny Casebere, , University of California, Los Angeles;Lian Rameson, , 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;and  Matthew  D.  Lieberman,  , 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles­  When  making  decisions  for 
others  (e.g.  children),  choosing  long‐term  benefits  for  them  and 
ignoring  short‐term  costs  may  have  a  powerful  impact  on  the 
child’s long‐term well‐being.  Parents often face the choice between 
giving  into  their  child’s  pleas  (short‐term  choice)  or  doing  “what’s 
best” in the long‐term for the child and making the child upset. The 
current  study  examines  the  neural  mechanisms  involved  when  a 
person chooses options that create short‐term pain, but long‐term 
gain for others. Do empathic responses in empathy‐related regions 
like dACC and anterior insula (Singer et al., 2004) drive or interfere 
with this choice?  Or do top down emotion regulatory processes in 
bilateral  VLPFC  and  posterior  DMPFC  (Berkman  &  Lieberman, 
2009)  facilitate  this  type  of  process?  Before  entering  the  scanner, 
participants  were  told  that  they  would  (1)  watch  a  another 
supposed  participant  (the  ‘player’),  who  is  outside  of  the  scanner 
trying  to  win  money  in  a  series  of  games,  (2)  have  the  ability  to 
override  the  player’s  choice  and  influence  their  monetary 
outcomes, and (3) be able to hear the player’s emotional reactions 
throughout  the  game.    Once  in  the  fMRI  scanner,  participants 
watched blocks of games with two different sets of instructions. For 
the  “Mandatory  Override”  blocks,  participants  were  told  that  they 
were required to switch the player to the worse monetary outcome 
for the majority of the games.  For the “Voluntary Override” blocks, 
participants  were  told  that  they  could  win  a  large  bonus  for  the 
player  if  participants  chose  to  voluntarily  switch  the  player  to  the 
worse  outcome  on  the  majority  of  the  games.    Throughout  all  the 
blocks,  participants  heard  the  player  get  upset  when  the  player’s 
choices  were  overridden  (pre‐recorded  audio  clips),  as  well  as 
hearing  the  player  react  positively  to  better  outcomes  when  the 
player was not overridden. In addition, reaction times for override 
choices  were  recorded  for  each  block.    Thus,  this  experimental 
design  allowed  us  to  compare  neural  responses  when    (1) 

 

j43
Self-regulatory fatigue: Neurophysiological
evidence that initial acts of control affect
subsequent control and emotion­  Jennifer  Gutsell, 
University of Toronto; and Michael Inzlicht, University of Toronto‐ Self‐
control is essential for adaptive behavior and is the basis for some 
of  the  most  culturally  valued  behaviors.  Self‐control,  however,  is 
limited:  Past  research  indicates  cognitive  control  depletes  quickly 
after  initial  exertions.  Although  regulatory  depletion  is  an 
extensively  researched  phenomenon,  the  exact  nature  of  the 

[50] 

depleted  state  remains  unclear.    Here,  we  examine  the  why  and 
how  of  regulatory  depletion  by  examining  its  neurocognitive  and 
emotional/motivational sequelae. In Study 1, participants watched 
an  emotional  movie  while  instructed  to  either  suppress  their 
emotions  or  watch  normally,  and  then  completed  an  ostensibly 
unrelated Stroop task while EEG was recorded. Results indicate that 
emotional suppression impaired Stroop reaction‐time performance, 
an  effect  mediated  by  a  lower  error‐related  negativity  (ERN)—a 
neural  waveform  generated  by  the  anterior  cingulate  cortex  and 
thought to index aspects of the affective reaction to the detection of 
errors.  In Study 2, participants watched a video of a person being 
interviewed while distracting words appeared at the bottom of the 
screen;  participants  were  instructed  to  either  control  their 
attention  ignoring  the  words,  or  to  watch  normally.  They  then 
viewed  positive,  negative,  and  neutral  IAPS  images  within  which 
were  embedded  50  ms  startle  auditory  probes  while  their  startle‐
blink response was measured with EMG. Results show a decrease in 
the startle‐blink response of depleted participants, suggesting that 
cognitive  suppression  dampened  the  strength  of  subsequent 
emotional  reactions.  In  study  3  participants  first  completed  the 
attention  control  task  used  in  study  2  and  then  received  positive, 
neutral  and  negative  feedback  on  their  performance  in  a  time 
estimation  task  while  their  EEG  was  recorded.    Results  indicate  a 
decrease in amplitude of the feedback related negativity (FRN) after 
the  presentation  of  negative  feedback  for  depleted  participants. 
Similarly  to the ERN,  the  FRN  is a  negative  deflection  in  the  Event 
related potential generated by the anterior cingulated cortex, but it 
follows  the  presentation  of  feedback  and  is  thought  to  reflect  the 
affective reaction to self‐relevant information. The decrease in FRN 
amplitude  following  negative  feedback  provides  further  evidence 
for  a  dampening  effect  of  previous  exertion  of  self‐control  on 
emotions,  specifically  the  emotional  reactions  to  negative  stimuli. 
Taken  together,  the  results  of  all  three  studies  offer  a  neural 
mechanism for regulatory depletion and suggest an important place 
for emotion in executive control. 

both  cognitive  closure  and  physical  relaxation.  Adults  described 
pleasure in creating gestalts new to their awareness (Shaw, 2006). 
We  found  that  each  participant  after  creating  a  'personally 
meaningful'  SymbolSort©  arrangement  had  a  change  in 
physiological  state  from   more  aroused  to  more  relaxed  as 
measured  by  change  in  breath   and  that  these  changes  correlated 
with  camcorder‐recorded  visual  cues  such  as  relaxation  of  the 
shoulders  or  smiling.  There  were  no  statistically  significant 
differences  due  to  age  or  gender.  Although  the  types  of 
arrangements  were  different  with  respect  to  pattern  and  level  of 
complexity,  there  was  a  measurable  common  state  of  relaxation 
associated  with  all  personal  meaning‐making.  The  relaxed  state 
resulting from a personally‐meaningful' experience is hypothesized 
to  increase  success  in  personal  reflection  and  also  in  communal 
collaboration.  This  has  ramifications  for  success  in  counseling, 
workgroups,  and  family  exchange.  If  each  member  of  a  group  can 
achieve  their  own  unique  personally‐meaningful  gestalt  related  to 
the  common  goal,  they  will  be  relaxed  and  potentially  ready  to 
communicate  with  others  about  the  meaning  of  their  own 
experience,  and  be  willing  to  communicate  with  others  about  the 
meaning of their experiences.    
 
I45
Stereotype Activation in Person Perception:
The Effects of Target Race on Neural Indexes
of Expectancy Violation‐  Ivo  I.  Gyurovski,  College  of 
William and Mary; and Cheryl L. Dickter, College of William and Mary­ 
Person  perception  research  has  demonstrated  that  expectancy‐
violating  information  about  people  is  remembered  better  (e.g., 
Stangor & McMillan, 1992) and processed differently (Bartholow et 
al.,  2001)  than  expectancy‐confirming  information.  Expectancy 
violation  occurs  when  a  discrepancy  exists  between  new 
information  and  pre‐existing  person  concepts,  leading  to  working 
memory  updating  (e.g.,  Bargh  &  Thein,  1985).  Research  using 
psychophysiological measures has shown that the P300 component 
of  the  Event‐Related  Brain  Potential  (ERP)  is  an  electrocortical 
index  of  working  memory  updating  (e.g.,  Donchin  &  Coles,  1988), 
and  its  amplitude  can  thus  be  used  to  index  neural  processes 
associated with expectancy violations. In fact, expectancy‐violating 
definitional  or  behaviorial  information  produces  larger  amplitude 
P300s  than  expectancy‐consistent  information  (e.g.,  Bartholow  et 
al.,  2001;  Osterhout  et  al.,  1997).  Additionally,  research  by 
Bartholow,  Dickter,  and  Sestir  (2006)  demonstrated  that  P300 
amplitude  was  larger  for  trials  in  which  race‐specific  stereotypes 
were inconsistent with the race of a target face prime, compared to 
trials  in  which  the  stereotype  was  consistent  with  the  race  of  the 
target face.  The goal of the current study was to examine whether 
the  neural  effects  of  encountering  expectancy  violations  after  the 
impression  formation  of  individuals  would  be  moderated  by  the 
social group (i.e., race) of the target individual. Participants (N=33) 
completed  a  computer  task  while  EEG  data  were  recorded.  Each 
trial of the task involved the presentation of a sentence describing 
an  action  that  a  fictitious  individual  did,  followed  by  a  picture  of 
either  a  Black  or  a  White  male  face.  The  actions  described  in  the 
sentences  reflected  commonly  held  racial  stereotypes  about  Black 
and White Americans, and were derived from a series of three pilot 
studies using different samples from the same population (N1=188, 
N2=68,  N3=49).  Each  sentence‐face  trial  represented  one  of  four 
conditions:  Stereotype‐Confirming‐Black,  Stereotype‐Violating‐
Black,  Stereotype‐Confirming‐White,  and  Stereotype‐Violating‐
White.  Participants  were  instructed  to  form  an  impression  of  the 
person  based  on  the  sentence  and  to  indicate  with  a  button  press 
whether  the  person  in  the  picture  could  potentially  be  the  person 
described  in  the  sentence.  The  P300  amplitude  was  quantified  as 
the maximum positive deflection from baseline at the Pz electrode 
site  between  250‐500  milliseconds,  and  was  time‐locked  to  the 
onset of the face stimulus. Results indicated a significant interaction 

j44
Different Ways to Make Meaning: Common
Relaxation Response‐  Julia  Penn  Shaw,  SUNY‐Empire  State 
College; This project seeks to identify psycho‐physiological evidence 
that  correlate  to  underlying  patterns  of  dimensionality  that 
adolescents/adults  use  to  construct  personal  meaning   (Shaw, 
2002).  Adults  constructed  'personal  meaning',  putting  ten  self‐
generated single abstract perspectives onto cards they then used to 
'create a personally‐meaningful arrangement'. Most used the cards 
to  construct  meaning  dimensions,  although  the  protocol  did  not 
specify  what  a  'personally  meaningful  arrangement'  looked  like. 
The  four  dimensions  (narrative,  ranking,  partition,  image/theme) 
appeared  to  provide  structure  for  psychological  'intention'.  Cross‐
sectional  research  showed  mature  adults  uniquely  combining  the 
four  dimensions  into  complex  meaning  structures.  These 
SymbolSort©  results  show  how  natural  and  concrete  these 
meaning  dimensions  are.Research  Design:  Participants  attending 
college, thirty from age 18 to 22, and thirty from age 40 to 55, equal 
males  and  females  in  each  group,  were  administered  the 
SymbolSort©  ,  untimed,  while  breath  measurements  were  taken. 
Using  the  SymbolSort©  protocol,  the  participant:  1)  read  a 
children's  story,  Encounter;   2)  listen  to  definition  of  a  single 
abstract perspective; 3) generated ten perspectives from the story 
and put them on cards; 4) physically arranges cards in a personally‐
meaningful way; 5) verbally described the personal meaning of the 
arrangement;  and  6)  recorded  the  arrangement  on  the  Symbol 
Sort© worksheet. SymbolSort© results (structure and complexity) 
were  evaluated  by  a  trained  assessor. In  prior  research  (Shaw, 
2002),  adults  who  constructed  "personally  meaningful" 
arrangements  using  the  SymbolSort©  process,  said  they  had  a 
personally‐meaningful  experience,  exhibiting  behaviors  suggesting 

 

[51] 

between  race  and  expectancy,  such  that  trials  presenting  Black 
targets following White (positive and negative) stereotype content 
elicited the largest P300 amplitude relative to the other conditions. 
Interactions between race and expectancy were also obtained in the 
N100 and P100 components, suggesting that these early attentional 
components  are  sensitive  to  differences  in  target  race  as  well  as 
impression‐related  information.  As  expected,  our  findings 
demonstrated  that  the  P300  amplitude  increased  following 
expectancy  violations,  but  was  further  moderated  by  race, 
suggesting  that  social  perceivers  may  be  especially  sensitive  to 
Black  male  targets  who  act  in  a  stereotype‐inconsistent  manner. 
These  results  have  important  implications  for  person  perception 
research examining stereotype‐related impression formation.

of  these  two  very  different  groups  they  prefer  to  empathize  with 
and  help.  According  to  a  Perception  Action  Mechanism  (PAM; 
Preston & de Waal, 2002), such differences in empathy and helping 
reflect  varying  levels  of  correspondence  between  the  state  and 
situation  of  the  target  and  the  observer’s  own  representations  for 
that  state  and  situation  from  prior  experience.  Affective 
neuroscience  has  yet  to  capitalize  on  these  “mismatches”  because 
the  early  neuroimaging  work  was  focused  on  demonstrating  the 
existence  of  neural  self‐other  overlap,  and  so  selected  affective 
experiences  that  should  not  deviate  from  person  to  person  (i.e., 
pain;  Singer  et  al.,  2004).  However,  the  predicted  mismatches 
between  self  and  other  should  be  easy  to  study  for  states  that  are 
expected  to  differ  in  systematic  ways  across  individuals.    We 
investigated  self‐other  interactions  in  empathy  by  testing  whether 
observers’ empathy and altruism for our distraught female patients 
would  vary  in  predictable  ways  based  on  their  predetermined 
associations  between  females  and  sadness.  Participants  first 
performed  an  IAT  task  to  measure  their  implicit  association 
between females and sadness and then watched two distraught and 
two  resilient  patient  videos.  For  each  patient,  they  reported  their 
level  of  empathic  concern,  personal  distress,  and  amount  of  help 
they  would  offer  as  well  as  an  actual  amount  of  their  subject 
payment money and number of hours they donated to the patient’s 
charity.  The  amount  of  empathy  and  helping  was  compared 
between  the  patient  types  and  correlated  with  each  participant’s 
IAT score.  Confirming the more general assumptions of the study, 
participants  did  overall  exhibit  a  stronger  association  between 
females (rather than males) and sadness and reported higher levels 
of  empathy,  helping  and  actual  money  donated  to  the  distraught 
compared  to  the  resilient  patients.  However,  confirming  the  more 
specific  predictions  of  the  PAM,  the  strength  of  participants’ 
association  between  females  and  sadness  significantly  predicted 
their differential monetary donation to the distraught over resilient 
patients (giving more to the distraught patients when they thought 
sadness was more normative for females).  In accordance with the 
PAM, helping increases not only when the target feels and displays 
need, but also when the observer resonates with that display for the 
particular  individual  and  situation.  Similar  extensions  of  this 
finding  are  expected  for  cultures  that  are  known  to  vary  in  their 
tolerance for high negative affect, with particularly reticent cultures 
perhaps even showing a reaction against the distraught patients. 

j46
ENHANCED
ATTENTIONAL
BIAS
TO
VISUAL
MARIJUANA CUES IN SMOKERS INDICATED BY
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS‐  Jesse  T.  Kaye,  University  of 
Colorado  at  Boulder;  Justin  T.  A.  Busch  ,  University  of  Colorado  at 
Boulder;  and  Tiffany  A.  Ito,  University  of  Colorado  at  Boulder­  Salient 
visual  marijuana  cues  may  capture  an  attentional  bias  among 
frequent  smokers  and  those  who  hold  positive  prototypes  of  peer 
marijuana users. Event‐related potentials have been demonstrated 
to  be  a  sensitive  measure  of  such  bias  to  drug  cues  among  drug 
dependent  users.  While  attentional  biases  have  been  well 
documented  in  cigarette,  alcohol,  cocaine,  and  heroin  dependent 
users,  there  is  a  paucity  of  data  to  substantiate  these  claims  in 
marijuana  users.  The  current  study  investigated  the  relationship 
between  ERPs  to  visual  marijuana  cues  and  marijuana  use  among 
recreational college users and non‐users. Participants completed a 
visual  oddball  paradigm  in  which  they  viewed  infrequent  target 
pictures  (related  to  either  marijuana  or  exercise)  within  a  context 
of  frequently  presented  neutral  images.  We  examined  the  late‐
positive  potential  (LPP),  which  is  sensitive  to  the  attentional  and 
motivational  salience  of  stimuli.  The  LPP  was  larger  to  both 
exercise‐  and  marijuana‐related  pictures  than  neutral  pictures, 
reflecting  a  general  oddball  effect.  However,  marijuana  pictures 
elicited  a  larger  LPP  than  equi‐probable  exercise  pictures  in 
smokers,  but  not  non‐smokers,  indicating  greater  processing  of 
these  drug  cues  among  users.  Furthermore,  the  LPP  to  marijuana 
images was positively correlated with both frequency of marijuana 
use and favorable prototypes of peer marijuana use. These findings 
suggest that heavier marijuana use and a more positive social view 
of marijuana users is associated with enhanced attentional capture 
or motivational significance of marijuana‐related stimuli. Drug cue 
LPP  reactivity  may  relate  to  craving,  precipitate  relapse  or 
represent  pre‐morbid  individual  differences  that  increase  risk  for 
drug dependence. 

I48
Differential gaze processing in attractive
and anomalous faces: A study of the reward
and pain networks- Yi Zhang, Brandeis University; and Leslie 
Zebrowitz, Brandeis University‐ Previous research has shown that the 
positive  response  toward  attractive  faces,  as  indicated  by  greater 
activity  in  the  reward  region,  was  enhanced  by  direct  gaze,  but 
weakened  by  averted  gaze  (Kampe  et  al.,  2001).  However,  little  is 
known  about  the  reward  value  of  direct  vs.  averted  gaze  in  faces 
with  extreme  low  attractiveness  such  as  anomalous  faces.  In 
addition,  no  research  has  examined  whether  the  ‘pain  network’  is 
also engaged by eye gaze cues.  Yet, averted gaze in attractive faces 
may  activate  this  region  insofar  as  it  evokes  feelings  of  social 
rejection  that  share  a  similar  neural  mechanism  with  the 
experience of physical pain (Eisenberger & Lieberman, 2004). The 
present study investigated whether eye gaze direction differentially 
modulates  perceivers’  neural  responses  to  attractive  and 
anomalous  male  faces  in  both  the  reward  and  the  pain  network. 
Twenty‐eight  participants  passively  viewed  a  random  order  of 
videos of attractive or anomalous faces zooming in and make gaze 
shifts toward or away from them, while being scanned in a Siemens 
3T  Allegra  MR  Scanner.  Functional  imaging  runs  consisted  of 
whole‐brain  acquisitions  (32  sagittal  slices,  4mm  thick,  TR  =  2 
seconds).  The  data  were  analyzed  by  FSL  4.0 
(www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) using each face type as a regressor in the 

I47 
Need is in the eye of the observer: Responses to
targets of need depend on observer-specific
associations between gender and affect- Alicia J. 
Hofelich, Unviersity of Michigan, Ann Arbor; and Stephanie D. Preston, 
Unviersity  of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor­    Much  of  the  prior  work  on 
empathy  has  attempted  to  find  characteristics  of  “good 
empathizers”  or  “good  targets”  by  identifying  the  personalities, 
situations,  or  expressions  that  predict  helping.  However,  there  are 
vast individual differences in the way people express need and even 
“effective”  emotional  displays  do  not  always  elicit  empathy  or 
helping, suggesting a complex interaction between the way targets 
express  their  need  and  the  way  observers  respond  to  them.  For 
example,  we  have  identified  at  least  five  distinct  emotional 
responses to serious illness ranging from negative and distraught to 
very positive and resilient, with observers varying widely in which 

 

[52] 

GLM,  and  group  effects  were  estimated  by  mixed‐effects  analysis 
(Beckmann  2003).  Statistic  images  were  thresholded  using 
voxelwise  P<.01  and  extent  threshold  of  15  continuous  voxels. 
Activated  clusters  in  a  priori  reward  and  pain  network  brain 
regions  of  interest  were  used  to  extract  BOLD  signal  change 
compared  to  fixation  from  each  participant  for  a  repeated  2 
(attractiveness)  x  2  (gaze  direction)  x  2  (subject  sex)  ANOVA 
followed by planned t‐tests.Activations in the neural reward circuit 
supported  the  prediction  that  direct  gaze  in  attractive  faces  was 
more  positively  perceived  than  averted  gaze,  with  the  reverse 
pattern  for  anomalous  faces.  Specifically,  anomalous  faces  with 
averted gaze elicited greater activation than direct gaze in regions 
that  respond  to  positive  rewards  (ACC  and  medial  OFC).  In  areas 
that  have  been  found  to  respond  to  negative  rewards  (LOFC), 
anomalous  faces  with  direct  gaze  elicited  greater  activation  than 
averted  gaze,  whereas  attractive  faces  with  averted  gaze  elicited 
greater activation than direct gaze. Also as predicted, activation in 
the  pain  network  (bilateral  insula  and  thalamus)  showed  greater 
responses to averted than direct gaze in attractive faces, but not in 
anomalous faces. In summary, the current study is the first to show 
evidence that eye gaze is differentially processed for faces with high 
and low attractiveness in the neural reward and pain networks.  

in the control subjects were seen in the bilateral caudate and right 
thalamus.  The reverse comparison showed no areas of significantly 
greater activation in BPI euthymic compared with controls subjects. 
Main  features  of  Bipolar  I  Disorder  include  extreme  emotional 
swings and difficulties in emotional regulation.  This study provides 
evidence  of  dysfunction  in  the  neural  networks  responsible  for 
emotional  reappraisal,  including  the  prefrontal  cortex,  cingulate 
and subcortical structures in BPI euthymic subjects. 
I50
Influence of varying levels of risk and
ambiguity on neural systems mediating
choice‐  Dan  Lopez  Paniagua,  Colorado  State  University;  Carol  A. 
Seger,  Colorado  State  University;  and  Matthew  G.  Rhodes,  Colorado 
State  University‐  Previous  studies  have  dissociated  two  types  of 
uncertainty  in  decision  making:  risk  and  ambiguity.  Generally, 
people prefer risky decisions to ambiguous ones, in a phenomenon 
known as ambiguity aversion. However, many of these studies have 
categorically  defined  ambiguity  as  a  complete  lack  of  information 
regarding  outcome  probabilities,  thereby  precluding  the  study  of 
how various neural substrates may acknowledge and track levels of 
ambiguity.  In  a  novel  task,  we  parametrically  varied  the  levels  of 
ambiguity  for  financial  decisions  involving  potential  monetary 
gains to better assess the neural representation of ambiguity and its 
contribution to ambiguity aversion or preference. Participants were 
presented  with  2  wheels  representing  different  gambles,  one 
ambiguous  and  one  risky.  Throughout  the  task,  the  risky  choice 
presented to participants was always a 50% chance of winning $2. 
This  was  presented  alongside  the  ambiguous  choice  in  which 
various  probabilities  of  winning  (20%,  33%,  50  %  or  80%)  were 
combined  with  different  potential  gains  (2$,  3$,  5$,  or  8$)  so  that 
expected values ranged from being better, equal or worse than the 
expected value of the risky decision. For both types of choices, the 
probability  of  obtaining  any  given  payout  was  indicated  along  the 
borders  of  the  wheel,  increasing  from  0%  to  100%  in  a  clockwise 
direction starting at the 12 o’clock position. For the risky gamble, a 
“dial”  explicitly  indicated  the  probability  of  winning.  For  the 
ambiguous  gamble,  there  was  no  dial  to  indicate  a  specific 
probability.  Instead,  a  blinder  that  covered  a  portion  of  the  wheel 
occluded the dial. This occlusion represented the possible range of 
percentages in which the actual probability of winning lay. Finally, 
the blinder covered 15%, 33%, or 66% of the wheel in order to vary 
the level of ambiguity. Participants completed this task while BOLD 
contrast  images  were  collected  using  a  3T  MR  scanner.Overall, 
participants were sensitive to the manipulations of expected value; 
subjects  selected  advantageous  choices  and  avoided 
disadvantageous  ones.  Interestingly,  there  was  an  interaction 
between  expected  value  and  ambiguity  level.  Participants  showed 
ambiguity  aversion  when  ambiguity  increased,  which  means 
subjects  opted  more  for  the  risky  option  (despite  having  lower 
expected  value)  when  the  choice  favored  the  ambiguous  gamble. 
However, participants actually showed ambiguity preference when 
the level of ambiguity increased for trials favoring the risky option. 
These results suggest a dynamic shift between risk aversion when 
ambiguity  is  low  to  ambiguity  aversion  when  ambiguity  is  high. 
Moreover,  our  imaging  results  suggest  areas  of  the  striatum  and 
medial  prefrontal  cortex  are  necessary  for  tracking  levels  of 
ambiguity. 

I49
Dysfunction of frontal and subcortical
regions
during
an
emotional
downregulation task in euthymic Bipolar I
Disorder subjects using fMRI- Jennifer  D.  Townsend, 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  Lara  Foland‐Ross,  University  of 
California,  Los 
Angeles;  Susan  Y.  Bookheimer,  University  of  California, 
 
Los Angeles; and Lori L. Altshuler, University of California, Los Angeles, 
VA  Greater  Los  Angeles  Healthcare  System  Bipolar  disorder  is 
characterized  by  symptoms  of  extreme  mood  states  indicating 
possible  dysfunction  of  emotion  regulatory  networks.    In  normal 
control  populations,  the  processing  of  emotional  faces  has  been 
demonstrated  to  activate  the  amygdala  and  orbitofrontal  cortex 
(OFC),  with  the  OFC  playing  a  role  in  the  down‐regulation  of 
emotional  responses.  This  study  sought  to  investigate  the 
functional  underpinning  of  cognitive  reappraisal  of  emotions  in 
subjects  with  Bipolar  I  Disorder  while  euthymic  and  control 
subjects using fMRI. 30 adult BPI subjects (11F/19 M; ave. age=37.6 
±13.2 yrs.) and 26 control subjects (11F/15M; ave. age=35.8 ± 12.6 
yrs.)  underwent  fMRI  scanning  while  performing  an  emotion 
processing  task  which  required  the  simple  viewing  (“observe 
negative”)  or  cognitive  reappraisal  (“decrease  negative”)  of 
negative emotional stimuli.  Distress level was measured by asking 
subjects  to  rate  their  average  distress  level  after  performing  the 
reappraisal  task.    Whole‐brain  activation  patterns  were  analyzed 
using  FSL  4.0.  Contrasts  were  made  for  each  group  comparing  the 
“decrease  negative”  vs.  “observe  negative”  conditions,  and  these 
contrasts  were  entered  into  a  between‐group  random  effects 
analysis to assess between‐group differences in activation. Distress 
ratings  did  not  differ  significantly  between  the  subject  groups 
(p=0.48).    Within  groups,  control  subjects  showed  robust  bilateral 
activation of multiple frontal and subcortical regions (Z>2.3, p=0.05 
corrected).    Between‐group  analyses  revealed  this  activation  was 
significantly  decreased  in  BPI  subjects,  specifically  in  the  bilateral 
medial  frontal  gyrus  (BA6),  bilateral  middle  frontal  gyrus  (BA 
46/9),  right  pre‐central  gyrus  (BA4),  right  inferior  frontal  gyrus 
(BA47)  and  bilateral  anterior  and  posterior  cingulate  (BA24  and 
23)  (Z>2.0,  p=0.05  corrected).    Other  regions  of  greater  activation 

 

[53] 

