Social & Affective Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting 2013
April 12-13, Hilton Financial District
San Francisco, CA
Local Organizers
Elliot Berkman, University of Oregon
Jennifer Pfeifer, University of Oregon

Talk/Poster Selection Committee
Elliot Berkman, University of Oregon
Amanda Bruce, University of Missouri
Emily Falk, University of Michigan
Kateri McRae, University of Denver
Jennifer Pfeifer, University of Oregon
Leah Somerville, Harvard University
Jamil Zaki, Stanford University

SANS Executive Committee
Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin
Tor Wager, University of Colorado at Boulder
Mauricio Delgado, Rutgers University
Elliot Berkman, University of Oregon
Todd Heatherton, Dartmouth College
Leah Somerville, Harvard University
Thalia Wheatley, Dartmouth College

Schedule-at-a-glance
Thursday April 11
Start

End

Session

6:00 PM

9:00 PM

Registration

7:00 PM

9:00 PM

Welcome Reception & Cash Bar, 750 Lounge

Friday April 12
Start

End

Session

8:00 AM

9:00 AM

Continental Breakfast and registration

9:00 AM

10:15 AM

Symposium Session A: Mentalizing & Joint Attention

10:15 AM

10:35 AM

Coffee Break

10:35 AM

11:50 AM

Symposium Session B: Social Networks & Reward

11:50 AM

12:00 PM

ICNC SANS Travel Award Presentation (Ballroom Foyer)

11:50 AM

1:30 PM

Lunch Break

1:30 PM

2:45 PM

Symposium Session C: Motivated Perception

2:45 PM

4:15 PM

Poster Session D (4th floor)

4:15 PM

4:35 PM

Coffee Break

4:35 PM

5:50 PM

Symposium Session E: Intergroup Processes

5:50 PM

7:10 PM

Presidential Introduction & Distinguished Scholar Address

7:10 PM

9:00 PM

Reception & Cash Bar, 750 Lounge

Saturday April 13
Start

End

Session

8:00 AM

9:00 AM

Continental Breakfast and registration

9:00 AM

10:15 AM

Symposium Session F: Emotion & Regulation

10:15 AM

10:35 AM

Coffee Break

10:35 AM

12:05 PM

Keynote Symposium: Communicating About Neuroscience

12:05 PM

1:30 PM

Lunch Break

1:30 PM

2:45 PM

Symposium Session G: Health & Risk Behaviors

2:45 PM

4:15 PM

Poster Session H (4th floor)

4:15 PM

4:35 PM

Coffee Break

4:35 PM

5:50 PM

Symposium Session I: Clinical Applications & Connectivity

5:50 PM

7:20 PM

Poster Session J (4th floor)

2013 Awards
Distinguished Scholar Award
Ralph Adolphs, California Institute of Technology
Innovation Award
Tal Yarkoni, University of Colorado, “Large-scale automated synthesis of human
functional neuroimaging data”
SANS Poster Awards
Eric S. Allard, Boston College
Shir Atzil, Northeastern University
Bonnie Auyeung, University of Cambridge
Matthew Brook O’Donnell, University of Michigan
Christopher N. Cascio, University of Michigan
Claudia Civai, University of Minnesota
Rebecca J. Lepping, University of Kansas
Jordan Livingston, University of Oregon
Flavia Mengarelli, University of Bologna
Laura Michaelson, University of Colorado
Jordan Miller-Ziegler, University of Oregon
Vanessa Puetz, University Hospital Aachen
Ajay Satpute, Northeastern University
Kamila E. Sip, Rutgers University
Steven Tompson, University of Michigan
Hongbo Yu, Peking University
SANS Graduate Student Travel Awards
Louis Chim, Stanford University
Alexander Genevsky, Stanford University
Erica Hornstein, UCLA
Tristen K. Inagaki, UCLA
Carolyn Parkinson, Dartmouth University
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Student Travel Award
(Made possible by Oxford University Press)
Rachel Ellis, University of Melbourne
International Cultural Neuroscience Consortium Travel Awards
Jessica Busler, Auburn University
Non Pornpattananangkul, Northwestern University
Vanessa Puetz, University Hospital Aachen
Lucia Sacheli, Sapienza University of Rome
Steven Tompson, University of Michigan
Fei Yang, University of Southern California

Symposia Presentations
Session A

Mentalizing & Joint Attention
Friday, April 12, 2013
9:00 - 10:15 AM
Ulrich Pfeiffer, University Hospital Cologne
B. Locke Welborn, University of California, Los Angeles
Frank Van Overwalle, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Robert Spunt, California Institute of Technology

ABSTRACTS
ARE YOU HUMAN? COMBINING INTERACTIVE EYE-TRACKING AND FMRI TO
INVESTIGATE THE REWARDING NATURE OF SOCIAL ENCOUNTERS Ulrich Pfeiffer,
University Hospital Cologne; Leonhard Schilbach, University Hospital Cologne, Max-PlanckInstitute for Neurological Research; Bert Timmermans, University Hospital Cologne; Bojana
Kuzmanovic, Research Center Juelich; Gary Bente, University of Cologne; Kai Vogeley, University
Hospital Cologne, Research Center Juelich – We are involved in various forms of social
encounters on a daily basis and gain much of our knowledge about others by interacting
with them. Moreover, we enjoy and strive for being in interaction with others. It has thus
been argued that there is an intrinsic motivational drive for engaging in social interaction.
However, there is a scarcity of studies examining the neural mechanisms supporting more
basic social interactions face-to-face and in real-time due to the lack of appropriate methods.
Here we present a combined eye-tracking and fMRI paradigm in which participants interact
with a virtual agent in a series of gaze-based interaction blocks. These blocks consisted of
five trials in each of which the agent would either engage in joint or non-joint attention after
participants fixated an object on the screen. Participants believed that the agent’s gaze
behavior was either controlled by another participant or a computer program. For each
block, they had to judge whether they experienced the interaction as social or non-social
based on the agent’s reactions. Unbeknownst to them, the agent was always controlled by a
computer to allow for a systematic manipulation of gaze reactions ranging from zero to five
out of five possible instances of joint attention. In addition, the experiment consisted of two
phases in which the interaction partner was introduced as naïve to their task or as explicitly
cooperative. This allowed us to create a tool to distinguish neural activity underlying the
subjective experience of being in engaged in social and non-social interaction in a naïve (i.e.
baseline) and cooperative context. This has the advantage that participants are not informed
a priori about the nature of their interaction partner as it is the case in many neuroeconomic
approaches to social interaction. Instead, their experience of being in interaction with
another human depends exclusively on the dynamics of the interaction. Results demonstrate
that the subjective experience of human interaction is correlated with increased activation of
the ventral striatum, while the experience of non-social interaction is associated with
increased activity across a fronto-parietal attention network. In the naïve condition, the
differential ventral striatal activation for social interaction is present early during the
interaction. In contrast, it increases parametrically over the time course of the interaction
block in the cooperative condition and hence seems to support two different types of
cognitive processes during naïve and cooperative interaction: In the first case, it signals an
automatic preference which is likely to be based on early mechanisms of impression
formation. In the latter, the striatum encodes the accumulation of value, that is, the buildup

of evidence that the interaction partner is human. These results provide first evidence that
the subjective experience of being in interaction recruits the reward system even without the
presence of an explicitly cooperative interactor and hence give strong support to the idea of
an intrinsic neural motivation to interact with others.
PERSON-SPECIFIC THEORY OF MIND: THE ROLE OF VMPFC IN MENTALIZING B.
Locke Welborn and Matthew D. Lieberman; University of California, Los Angeles – Numerous
studies have demonstrated the involvement of medial prefrontal cortex in human Theory of
Mind, but distinct perspectives have been offered to explain the apparent divergence in
function between dorsal (DMPFC) and ventral (VMPFC) subregions. While DMPFC activity
is observed when reasoning about the mental states of unknown or abstract individuals,
VMPFC function during mentalizing has been associated variously with self-reflection,
projection of self-characteristics onto similar others, and mentalizing about close others. We
propose a novel theoretical framework that accounts for and extends prior findings: VMPFC
is involved in representing and using person-specific Theories of Mind (ToMp) that
represent the unique, idiosyncratic traits of well-known individuals regardless of their
similarity or closeness to oneself. In order to test this hypothesis, we used fMRI to assess the
VMPFC response in participants who strongly identified as either Democrats or Republicans
as they evaluated the personality traits of political figures of both parties about whom they
possessed varying degrees of knowledge. Consistent with the ToMp account, VMPFC
showed greater activity to targets about whom participants were especially knowledgeable,
irrespective of participants’ reported perceptions of similarity or feelings of closeness. In the
clearest test of the ToMp hypothesis, VMPFC responded more strongly to well-known than
not well-known targets of the opposing party, but VMPFC responded similarly to wellknown targets from both the opposing and one’s own political party. Other analyses rule
out similarity and closeness as mechanisms that could explain these effects. Only the ToMp
account would predict strong VMPFC responses to disliked and dissimilar, but well-known
political targets. These results suggest that VMPFC may complement the generic
mentalizing processes (ToMg) of DMPFC with more individuated psychological
representations of specific well-known others.
THE FUNCTION OF THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX: TRAIT CODE AND NONSOCIAL REASONING Frank Van Overwalle, Ning Ma, Kris Baetens, and Marie
Vandekerckhove; Vrije Universiteit Brussel – The medial Prefrontal Cortex (mPFC) is critically
involved in inference about the traits of the self and others. In a first fMRI study, we
investigated whether the mPFC also represents the neural code for traits, or trait code. To
localize the trait code, we used fMRI-adaptation, which is a rapid suppression of neuronal
responses upon repeated presentation of the same underlying stimulus, in this case, the
implied trait. Participants had to infer an agent’s(social) trait from brief trait-implying
behavioral descriptions. In each trial, the critical (target) sentence was preceded by a
sentence (prime) that implied the same trait, the opposite trait, or no trait at all. The results
revealed robust suppression of activation in the ventral mPFC only. Crucially, this
adaptation effect was graded: strongest after being primed with a similar trait, moderate
after an opposite trait and negligible after a trait-irrelevant prime. These findings indicate
that a trait code is represented in the ventral mPFC. However, the mPFC is not only
involved in the processing of mental states, but is often also involved in tasks that don’t
involve mental state inferences. We hypothesized that the mPFC might be involved in high
construal of stimuli, defined as the formation of abstract concepts or ideas by omitting nonessential features of stimuli. In a second fMRI study, we presented pictures of a person
engaged in everyday activities (social stimuli) or of objects (non-social stimuli), and induced
a higher level of abstraction by instructing participants to generate personality traits of the
person or categories to which the objects belonged. This was contrasted against a lower level
task where participants had to describe these same pictures visually. As predicted, we found
strong involvement of the dorsal mPFC in high construal, with substantial overlap across
social and non-social stimuli. In a third fMRI study, we pitted the construal level
explanation for these results against an explanation in terms of high versus low constrained
processing, but found only evidence for the construal level manipulation.

EVIDENCE THAT THE EVOKED RESPONSE OF DORSOMEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX TO FIXATION BASELINE FACILITATES SOCIAL (BUT NOT NONSOCIAL)
INFERENTIAL (BUT NOT NON-INFERENTIAL) Robert Spunt, California Institute of
Technology; Meghan Meyer, and Matthew Lieberman; University of California, Los Angeles –
People draw inferences about each other with great efficiency. Such inferences are typically
executed in order to refer transient observed behaviors (e.g., “smiling”) to relatively more
permanent unobservable states (“friendly”). A large body of evidence has delineated a set of
brain regions that are reliably correlated with the performance of such mental state
inferences: the mentalizing system. Intriguingly, this system shows considerable anatomical
overlap with the default mode network, so-called because it is exhibits strong, integrated
activity when people are at rest, for instance, duration fixation baseline periods. Here, we
used fMRI to test the hypothesis that activity of the mentalizing system during these fixation
periods prior to social inferential judgments would increase the efficiency of such
judgments. 21 healthy adults underwent event-related fMRI while executing three types of
judgments: social inferential (evaluating a mental description of a photographed behavior);
social non-inferential (evaluating a motor description of a photographed behavior); or nonsocial (evaluating an arithmetical expression). Social inferential judgments robustly
activated the mentalizing system, and many of the same areas were robustly de-activated by
the non-social task when compared to the fixation baseline periods in between each trial. A
parametric analysis of response time revealed that increased activity during these pre-trial
periods in one of these regions, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, was associated with faster
response times social (but not non-social) inferential (but not non-inferential) judgments.
This provides the best support yet for a functional link between default activity of the
mentalizing system and the execution of social inferences.

Session B

Social Networks & Reward
Friday, April 12, 2013
10:35 - 11:50 AM
Noam Zerubavel, Columbia University
Carolyn Parkinson, Dartmouth College
* SANS Graduate Student Travel Award Winner

Katja N. Spreckelmeyer, Stanford University & RWTH Aachen University
Sylvia Morelli, Stanford University & University of California, Los Angeles

ABSTRACTS
THE BRAIN BASIS OF PERSON PERCEPTION AND SOCIAL COGNITION IN REALWORLD SOCIAL NETWORKS Noam Zerubavel, Peter Bearman, and Kevin Ochsner; Columbia
University – Humans are a fundamentally social species, and the social networks in which
we are each embedded constitute significant determinants of our physical and psychological
well-being. Navigating interactions within these social networks requires efficient
computational mechanisms for processing social information about network members as
well as our own idiosyncratic relations to them. The present study investigates the neural
substrates underlying these social-cognitive processes critical for person perception in realworld social networks. We developed a novel neuroimaging paradigm for person
perception research that incorporates a round-robin design: the participants are all members
of the same face-to-face social network (i.e., the Executive Board members of an MBA
student group); in the scanner, they each passively view photographs of their social
network’s members. Since each network member is represented in the study as both a

participant (Perceiver) and a stimulus (Target of social perception), this round-robin design
enables analyses at the level of the Perceiver, the Target, and Perceiver X Target interactions
unique to each interpersonal relationship. In addition to implicit neural responses collected
during the fMRI passive face-viewing task, outside of the scanner we collected each network
member’s explicit ratings of self and others along fundamental dimensions emphasized
across studies of person perception in both social psychology and neuroscience research
(i.e., warmth, competence, trustworthiness, dominance, and attractiveness). We also utilize
social network analysis (SNA) to measure participants’ relative positions and interpersonal
ties within the network structure. SNA is an analytic technique that enables precise
measurements of sociometric variables by leveraging the interdependence of participants’
data (e.g., rather than assessing social status using only self-report measures, we compute
each individual’s network centrality by integrating relevant social metrics collected from
every member of the network). In the present study (n=26), we tested this novel paradigm in
two separate social networks, with each of the two networks (n=13) constituting a distinct
MBA student group’s Executive Board. We modeled participants’ neural activation patterns
during the fMRI passive-face viewing task with regressors incorporated from both the selfand peer-reported measures typical of person perception research as well as the sociometric
variables typical of SNA. Our findings suggest that the social-cognitive processes critical for
person perception in real-world social networks rely on brain systems implicated in reward,
emotion, and face perception. To our knowledge, the present research is the first
neuroimaging study to incorporate social network analysis, thereby integrating theoretical
and methodological frameworks across sociology, social psychology, and neuroscience.
A COMMON CORTICAL METRIC FOR SPATIAL, TEMPORAL AND SOCIAL
DISTANCE Carolyn Parkinson, Shari Liu and Thalia Wheatley, Dartmouth College – Converging
theories from cognitive linguistics, social psychology and evolutionary biology suggest that
different dimensions of psychological distance are encoded similarly. More specifically, the
prevalence of spatial language in descriptions of social and temporal distances (e.g., “close
friend,” “distant future”) may reflect the recycling of neural circuitry originally devoted to
spatial processing in order to “plot” increasingly abstract contents as the inferior parietal
lobule (IPL) expanded over the course of primate evolution. The IPL is recruited in spatial,
temporal and social distance processing. Do these overlapping activations reflect a shared
neural code or nearby but distinct codes for different dimensions of psychological distance?
The current study sought to resolve this question using multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA)
of fMRI data. Fifteen right-handed participants viewed photographs of acquaintances and
familiar others, phrases referring to the immediate or remote future, and pictures of objects
at different egocentric distances while being scanned in a 3T Philips scanner. Each trial
consisted of one stimulus for 0.5 s followed by a second stimulus from the same category
(physical, social or temporal) for 1.5 s. Two types of information-based searchlight
mapping were performed. The first set of analyses entailed training linear support vector
machine learning algorithms to discriminate one dimension of psychological distance
(“closer” vs. “farther” physical distance trials) and testing their accuracy in classifying trials
from another distance dimension (e.g., “sooner” vs. “later” temporal distance trials). All
combinations of distance dimensions were used for training and testing the classifier,
resulting in 6 accuracy maps for each participant. Each set of accuracy maps was spatially
normalized and arcsine-transformed before submission to a group analysis (one sample ttest vs. chance accuracy). The conjunction of significant results from all 6 tests revealed that
distances could be decoded across all dimensions in a large cluster in the right IPL,
suggesting that this region may represent social, spatial and temporal distances according to
a common metric. The second set of analyses probed for regions where the local
information content reflected subjective distance ratings. Behavioral representational
dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) were constructed based on each subject’s post-scan distance
ratings of stimuli. At each searchlight center, a neural RDM was generated based on
pairwise correlations between local neural response patterns to each condition, and the
significance of correlations between behavioral and neural RDMs was evaluated. The
representational similarity structure within the right IPL reflected that evinced in subjective
distance ratings, suggesting that population codes in this brain area may contribute to
explicit distance judgments. The current findings provide a potential neural basis for the
domain-general encoding of egocentric psychological distance. More generally, these results
are consistent with recent speculation that IPL circuitry originally devoted to spatial

processing may have been redeployed to operate on increasingly abstract contents as this
region expanded in size and function over the course of human evolution.
PROBING THE NEURAL BASIS OF SOCIAL APPROACH MOTIVATION Katja N
Spreckelmeyer, Stanford University &RWTH Aachen University; Lena Rademacher, Sarah Groppe,
Anna Gossen, RWTH Aachen University; Gregor Kohls, Robert T Schultz, Center for Autism
Research, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia; and Gerhard Gründer, RWTH Aachen University
- Motivation for goal-directed behavior largely depends on the expected value of the
anticipated reward. Mutual social interactions are experienced as innately rewarding, and
the desire to be with others and to relate with others on a personal level is a main driving
force of human behavior. However, despite a plethora of functional imaging studies trying
to unravel the neural base of motivated behavior, relatively little is still known about the
neural mechanisms guiding social approach behavior. Here, we present results from four
different studies that used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and a ‘social
incentive delay task’ to identify neural representations of social approach motivation in the
human brain. In our task, graphical cues were presented at the beginning of each trial to
inform participants whether or not social reward (a smiling face) could be gained upon
correct performance in the trial. This type of task has previously been successfully used to
link brain activation patterns to feelings of positive arousal at the prospect of gaining
reward. Specifically, Knutson et al. demonstrated that cued anticipation of monetary gains
leads to increasing levels of neural activation in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) of the
mesolimbic reward system, and that NAcc-activation mirrors self-reports of positive arousal
(reviewed in Knutson & Greer, 2008, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 363,
3771-3786). In study 1 and 2 of our study series, we found evidence that the NAcc is also
recruited during anticipation of positive social stimuli. Moreover, we were able to show that
NAcc activation was modulated by anticipated subjective reward value of the presented
faces. These findings confirm the NAcc’s role in coding motivational salience and extend it
to social stimuli. In study 3, we used the ‘social incentive delay task’ to test the theorydriven hypothesis that differences in social proficiency can be linked to fundamental
differences in social interest/ social motivation. Developmental psychologists have argued
that children who show a greater interest in social information (e.g. care giver’s face) are
better able to recognize social signals (eye gaze, emotional expressions) as cues of future
events, and that this mechanism helps them to develop social competence. Our study of
typically developing men scoring at extreme ends of the social proficiency spectrum yielded
evidence that individual differences in social proficiency are indeed associated with
differences in neural sensitivity towards the motivational salience of social incentives.
Finally, in study 4, we provide evidence that the neuro-hormone oxytocin plays a role in
attributing incentive salience to socially relevant cues. Oxytocin nasal spray application
significantly enhanced activation in the mesolimbic reward system during processing of
social reward predicting cues. Remarkably, behavioral effects of oxytocin (increased hit
rates) were more pronounced in individuals reporting low social interest. This finding
suggests that oxytocin may boost the incentive salience of social cues, hereby enhancing
social motivation. Together our findings give important insights into how the brain codes
incentive salience of social cues. They provide an important step in understanding the
neural underpinnings of social approach motivation in health and disease.
THE NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL CONSEQUENCES OF FEELING UNDERSTOOD
Sylvia A. Morelli, Stanford University & University of California, Los Angeles; Jared Torre, and
Naomi I. Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles – Behavioral research has
demonstrated that feeling understood by others enhances social closeness and intimacy, as
well as subjective well-being. In contrast, feeling misunderstood can be harmful to social
relationships, leading to loneliness and isolation. However, it is still unclear why and how
felt understanding exerts such a powerful impact on both interpersonal and
intrapersonalwell-being. Therefore, we will examine (1) what neural systems track felt
understanding and (2) if these neural systems can predict increased social closeness. In an
initial behavioral session, 31 UCLA undergraduates were videotaped as they described their
four most positive and four most negative autobiographical events. In addition, participants
were asked for their consent to show other UCLA students their videos. A subset of 19
participants returned for an fMRI scanning session approximately one week later.
Participants were told that they would see how other UCLA students had responded to four

of their previously recorded events (i.e. two positive and two negative). For each block in
the scanner, participants saw a 20-second video clip of their event, followed by three
sentences that another student had chosen in response to their video. Unbeknownst to the
participants, responses were actually pre-set to make the participant feel either understood
or not understood. Thus, each participant saw two responses (understanding and not
understanding) to each of their four events. After each block, participants rated how
understood they felt by the other student. After exiting the scanner, they also retrospectively
rated how they felt after seeing each student’s response (i.e. from very negative to very
positive), as well as how much they liked each student. A series of parametric analyses
demonstrated that activity in a reward-related region (i.e. ventral striatum, VS)
parametrically increased as individuals felt more positive and more understood by another
student’s response. In contrast, a region associated with negative affect (i.e. anterior insula,
AI) parametrically increased as individuals felt more negative and less understood by
another student’s response. Taken together, these results suggest that feeling understood
may be dually tracked by regions associated with positive and negative affect. Interestingly,
when individuals saw “not understanding” responses compared to neutral responses,
individuals with higher sensitivity to rejection showed increased neural activity in the
anterior insula. Lastly, parametric increases in VS also corresponded with increased liking
for the student, while parametric increases in AI corresponded with decreased liking. Taken
together, these data suggest that regions associated with positive and negative affect may
track how understood individuals feel by others, as well as predicting how much they like
the person providing feedback.

Session C

Motivated Perception
Friday, April 12, 2013
1:30 - 2:45 PM
David Amodio, New York University
Brent Hughes, Stanford University
Jay Van Bavel, New York University
Peter Mende-Siedlecki, Princeton University

ABSTRACTS
SOCIAL NEUROSCIENCE OF MOTIVATED PERCEPTION: INTERGROUP GOALS
AFFECT THE VISUAL ENCODING OF FACES David M. Amodio, New York University Social goals, such as to favor members of one’s own group, are known to bias the ways
people think about and act toward others. However, emerging evidence suggests that social
goals can also change the way we “see” faces of ingroup and outgroup members. I will
present three studies from my laboratory that examined the effect of intergroup goals on a
neural marker of early face encoding—the N170 component of the event-related potential,
which reflects activity in a network of neural regions that includes the fusiform gyrus.
Results indicated that in a minimal group situation, in which bias is driven by ingroup
favoritism, initial face encoding was enhanced for ingroup members compared with
outgroup members (Study 1). However, a different pattern emerged in a situation where
group membership was marked by conflict and outgroup threat: when White participants
viewed faces of Black and White males, encoding of Black outgroup faces was enhanced
among participants with strong implicit racial bias (Study 2) and in the context of intergroup
anxiety (Study 3), compared with the encoding of White faces. These early biases in visual
perception may contribute to downstream effects in cognition and behavior, suggesting a

new mechanism through which intergroup goals may lead to discrimination in social
behavior.
NEURAL SYSTEMS OF MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION Brent Hughes; Stanford
University - Decades of research demonstrate that motivation influences social cognition. For
example, people tend to evaluate themselves and certain other people in overly positive
ways across different contexts. However, neural models have been relatively silent about
how motivation influences the neural level of analysis. The experiments presented here
attempt to deepen our understanding of how positively-biased evaluations occur as a
function of different motivational contexts. I will present results from studies that explore
the neural mechanisms of positively biased social cognition by first identifying a core set of
neural regions associated with positivity bias, examining whether a heightened selfprotection motivation elicited by threatening social-evaluative feedback changes the
engagement of those neural systems, and specifying some of the precise computations and
mechanisms supported by those regions. First, we found that the motivation to see the self
and other people in a positive light modulates the extent to which ventral anterior cingulate
(vACC) differentiates positive from negative information. Second, we found that medial
orbitofrontal cortex (MOFC) may be a convergence zone for positivity bias in the brain.
Across studies, we found that MOFC was modulated by the degree of positively biased
responses. In the first set of studies (Studies 1-3), MOFC was negatively modulated by
better-than-average judgments. The more people viewed themselves and other people as
better-than-average, the less they recruited OFC activation. In addition, we applied a datadriven, multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) approach and found that MOFC may compute a
trial-by-trial trait importance signal that predicts degree of positivity bias. The next study
(Study 4), examined whether self-esteem threat changes the engagement of the neural
systems associated with positively-biased self-evaluation. I used the same approach as
previous studies to measure positivity (“better-than-average” ratings) to maximize
comparability between results, but elicited positivity bias with an explicit threat
manipulation. I found that threat changed the engagement of neural systems associated with
positivity bias as well as engaged additional neural modulation. In particular, positivity bias
in response to threat was associated with increased MOFC activation, as well as additional
recruitment of amygdala and insula. Furthermore, MOFC activation predicted individual
differences in increased positivity bias in response to threat. Finally, Study 5 examined the
psychological processes that are supported by OFC in positively biased evaluation.
Elucidating the mechanisms supported by MOFC in positively biased evaluation may lead
to a deeper understanding of whether positivity biases represent a single phenomenon or
multiple phenomena as a function of the motivational context. This study takes a step
towards addressing this question by combining a signal detection (SDT) approach and a
contextual manipulation that permits the measurement of a process that influences the
expression of positively-biased evaluation in different contexts. I found that MOFC
activation predicted shifts in decision thresholds that influence the expression of positivelybiased responses as a function of the motivational context. The findings provide some
preliminary evidence that positivity biases may represent distinct processes in different
motivational contexts.
SOCIAL IDENTITY SHAPES SOCIAL PERCEPTION AND EVALUATION: EVIDENCE
FROM BEHAVIORAL, ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY AND NEUROIMAGING
EXPERIMENTS Jay Van Bavel, New York University - Correctly identifying group members
is critical for successfully navigating complex social environments. I will review a series of
behavioral, electroencephalography, and neuroimaging experiments that demonstrate the
dynamic influence of social identity on perception and evaluation. Across experiments, we
assigned people to one of two mixed-race minimal groups and had them respond to faces of
Black and White in-group and out-group members. This allowed us to compare the effects
of a minimal social identity with a visually salient social category—race. Across
methodologies, we found that assigning people to mixed-race minimal groups eliminated
ostensibly automatic racial biases by leading people to categorize others on the basis of their
minimal group membership rather than their race. Specifically, we found that minimal
group membership influenced BOLD activity in core (Fusiform Face Area) and extended
(amygdala) components of the face processing network, emerged as early as 100
milliseconds (P100) after face onset, and shaped consequential downstream behavior

(automatic evaluations and recognition memory). This pattern was evident despite the fact
that the intergroup distinction was arbitrary, there were no visual cues to distinguish
groups, and exposure to the faces was equivalent and brief. Follow-up experiments
confirmed that this pattern of in-group bias was mediated by visual attention during
learning and moderated by social roles and motives (e.g., the need to belong). However,
multi-voxel pattern analyses of BOLD data revealed that membership in a mixed-race group
does not make the visual system “color-blind” to race. Taken together, this program of
research suggests that ostensibly automatic forms of racial bias are not inevitable, but are
sensitive to seemingly trivial social identity motives that shape the value of in-group and
out-group members.
THE NEURAL DYNAMICS OF UPDATING IMPRESSIONS Peter Mende-Siedlecki, Sean
Baron, Yang Cai, and Alexander Todorov, Princeton University - As humans, we are faced with
a constant challenge: figuring out the other humans around us. In service of this challenge,
we form stable impressions of other people based on their behavior. In recent years, the
neural bases of initial, behavior-based impression formation have been well documented.
However, impression formation is a dynamic process that continuously evolves over time.
Other people often surprise us with their unpredictability, and in some cases, it becomes
necessary to update our initial impressions when new, inconsistent information comes to
light. We devised two fMRI studies focused on the neural dynamics underlying impression
updating, with two primary goals: 1) identifying the network of regions involved in the
updating process, and 2) assessing the degree to which activity in this network is impacted
by valence, behavioral content, and behavioral diagnosticity. In both studies, participants
saw faces paired with valenced behavioral information and were asked to form impressions
of these individuals. Each face was seen five times in a row, each time with a different piece
of behavioral information. Critically, some of the individual were inconsistent, in that the
valence of the information changed on the fourth trial—making the fourth and fifth trials
inconsistent with information previously learned about that individual and necessitating
that participants update their impressions. Across both studies, we observed a consistent set
of regions associated with updating impressions, including dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
(dmPFC), lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC), superior temporal sulcus (STS), and inferior
parietal lobule (IPL). Previous research suggests that negative information is more
diagnostic in the morality domain, while positive information is more diagnostic in the
ability domain. One possibility is that highly immoral and highly competent behaviors are
simply less statistically frequent in the environment, and as such, they are therefore more
informative towards the ultimate goal of impression formation. Our second study was
designed specifically to compare the updating of impressions based on morality- and
ability-related attributions. While we hypothesized that activity in the updating network
would reflect similar behavioral asymmetries based on diagnosticity, we also tested for the
possibility that the network might show preferential activity when updating based on
content (ability vs. morality) or valence. While content and valence did not impact updaterelated activity across the network, bilateral vlPFC and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) were
more strongly associated with updating impressions based upon diagnostic information.
These results suggest that one parsimonious principle—behavioral diagnositcity—guides
impression updating on a neural level.

Session D

Poster Presentations: Session 1
Friday, April 12, 2013
2:45 - 4:15 PM

Session E

Intergroup Processes
Friday, April 12, 2013
4:35 - 5:50 PM
Eva Telzer, University of Illinois
Michael Norton, Harvard Business School
Lasana Harris, Duke University
Leor Hackel, New York University

ABSTRACTS
THE IMPACT OF EARLY EXPOSURE ON RACE-RELATED AMYGDALA ACTIVITY:
AN INTERNATIONAL ADOPTION DESIGN Eva H. Telzer, Yang Qu, University of Illinois;
Kathryn Humphreys, Jessica Flannery, and Nim Tottenham, University of California, Los Angeles –
Adults’ behavioral and neural response to race has received much attention in the past
decade (Lieberman et al., 2005). Recent research suggests that race-specific amygdala
response emerges over development, suggesting that experience plays a role in race-related
processing (Telzer et al., in press). Yet, we know little about how the amount of experience
with own- and other-race faces impacts children’s understanding of race. The amount of
experience—or lack of experience—with race is difficult to quantify in the United States, an
increasingly diverse society. Thus, we implemented an international adoption design and
examined children who were adopted by American families from either Asian or European
countries. The adoption design quantifies children’s early exposure (i.e., to purely Asian
faces or European faces). Because the date of adoption is documented, it provides a natural
index of the amount of early exposure to a specific racial group and when that exposure
ends. Participants included 34 internationally adopted children from Asian (N=15,
Mage=10.99 years, age range=6.5-14.8yrs) and European countries (N=19, Mage=9.94 years,
age range=6.33-15.66 years). The two groups were adopted at similar ages (Mage: Asian
children=22.53 months, SD=20.39; European children=36.45 months, SD=33.02). Children
were scanned while performing an Emotional Matching Task adapted from Telzer et al. (in
press) in which children had to select a face expressing the same emotion as a target face.
Participants completed one run in which all the faces were European-American and one run
in which all the faces were Asian. All analyses control for children’s age. We first examined
group difference in behavioral performance on the emotional matching task. Asian children
had significantly higher accuracy (99% accurate) than European children (87.5% accurate)
when matching Asian faces whereas no group difference was found to European-American
faces (95% and 96% accuracy, respectively). Moreover, when all children were examined
together, children with less early exposure to Asian faces (i.e., adopted later for European
children; adopted earlier for Asian children) had significantly worse performance when
matching the Asian faces (Œ≤=-.44, p<.05). Next, we examined group differences in racerelated amygdala activity to race. There was a double-dissociation between Asian and
European children in amygdala responsivity to Asian and European faces; amygdala
response to European faces was high in children adopted from Asia, and amygdala response
to Asian faces was high in children adopted from Europe. Moreover, when all children were
examined together, regression analyses showed that less postnatal time exposed to Asian
faces (i.e., adopted later for European children; adopted earlier for Asian children) predicted
significantly higher amygdala response to Asian faces (Œ≤=.57, p<.001). Thus, early absence
of race exposure may result in those faces being more salient at the level of the amygdala
and behavior, suggesting that early exposure to race is essential for children’s
understanding of race. These findings underscore the importance of exposing children to
diverse groups at an early age.

AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF RACIAL PARALYSIS Michael I. Norton, Harvard Business
School; Malia F. Mason, Columbia Business School; Joseph A. Vandello, University of South Florida;
Andrew Biga, University of South Florida; Rebecca Dyer, Yale University – We explore the
existence and underlying neural mechanism of a new norm endorsed by both black and
white Americans for managing interracial interactions: “racial paralysis,” the tendency to
opt out of decisions involving members of different races. We show that people are more
willing to make choices—such as who is more intelligent, or who is more polite—between
two white individuals (same-race decisions) than between a white and a black individual
(cross-race decisions), a tendency which was evident more when judgments involved traits
related to black stereotypes. We use functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine the
mechanisms underlying racial paralysis, to examine the mechanisms underlying racial
paralysis, revealing greater recruitment of brain regions implicated in socially appropriate
behavior (ventromedial prefrontal cortex), conflict detection (anterior cingulate cortex),
deliberative processing (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex), and inhibition (ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex). We also discuss the impact of racial paralysis on the quality of interracial
relations.
SOCIAL NEUROSCIENCE EVIDENCE FOR EVERYDAY DEHUMANIZATION Lasana
T. Harris, Duke University - Previous social neuroscience research documents reduced social
cognition brain network activity to extreme social outgroups (see Harris & Fiske, 2009, for
review), males viewing scantily clad females (Cikara, Eberhardt, & Fiske, 2010), psychopaths
when viewing everyday people (Aharoni, et al., in prep), and violent video game players
before they pull a trigger to eliminate an enemy (Mathiak & Weber, 2006). This reliable
modulation of the social cognition brain network demonstrates a boundary condition to this
cognitive ability across a variety of social targets and among varied human populations.
Moreover, it suggests that this type of social cognition brain network modulation may serve
functions preserved in evolution for social interaction. Specifically, having the ability to not
see human beings as such may facilitate behavior otherwise reserved for non-human agents.
This suggests that any social target could suffer dehumanized perception, and any group of
people could engage this social perception if the social context structures rewards during the
social interaction to behavior otherwise reserved for non-human agents. I present recent
social neuroscience research documenting this phenomenon across three studies using
economic game, legal decision-making, and facial mimicry paradigms. In study one, an
initial sample of participants played a time estimation game. Each of these participants was
assigned a price based on their accuracy. A second sample of participants then came to the
lab, were endowed with $20, and purchased five team members from the league. They were
then scanned one week later, where they viewed the previous performance of both players
they purchased and players they did not while assigning value to each player. We find that
participants changed the value players they purchased more after incorrect than correct
responses, and players they did not purchase more after correct than incorrect responses.
More interestingly, brain imaging results show reduced social cognition network brain
activity when participants first observe the faces of their own players’ relative to nonpurchased players; a decrease that facilitated brain regions active during later subjective
valuation. In study two, participants read vignettes describing crimes accompanied by
statements referring to the perpetrators personality before making responsibility and
punishment decisions. Personality descriptions are either presented with biological or
personality language. We find that personality described using biological language
mitigates responsibility and punishment decisions, as well as activity in brain regions
underlying logic. In study three, participants categorize facial expressions along a social or
physical dimension tied to eye color while we record facial electromyography (EMG). We
find that participants do not spontaneously mimic facial expressions when categorizing
along the physical dimension despite the fact that the same facial feature (eye color) is used
in both conditions. Together, these studies present social neuroscience evidence that
reduced social cognition may facilitate behavior not reserved for human beings.
SOCIAL IDENTITY ALTERS MIND PERCEPTION: BEHAVIORAL AND
NEUROIMAGING EVIDENCE Leor M. Hackel, New York University; Christine E. Looser,
Harvard Business School; John T. Jost, New York University; Jay Van Bavel, New York University –
The tendency to infer goals, thoughts, and feelings behind the faces of others—termed mind
perception—is a reflexive and ubiquitous feature of human social cognition, and influences

the extent to which people see others as worthy of moral consideration. However, the
natural human propensity for mind perception may be bound by social group membership.
In a combination of behavioral and neuroimaging experiments, we examined how
identification with different social groups—termed social identity—influences mind
perception. In each experiment, participants assessed a continuum of morphs along 11
points between human and doll faces described as in-group or out-group members.
Participants were told that half the faces were based on in-group members and half were
based on out-group members. Initial behavioral experiments confirmed that participants
had lower (i.e., more lenient) thresholds for perceiving minds behind in-group faces, both in
minimal groups in Experiment 1 and real-world groups (New York University/Boston
University) in Experiment 2. In other words, in-group members required less humanness
than out-group members to be perceived as having minds. To determine whether social
identity was modulating the underlying perception of faces or merely their categorization,
we regressed the objective amount of humanness in each face (i.e., the 11 stimulus points)
and the subjective percept of mind (i.e., each subject’s binary responses) on BOLD signal
during neuroimaging, as participants viewed face morphs described as in-group
(Americans) or out-group (Russians) (Experiment 3). Degree of objective humanness was
positively associated with activity in bilateral fusiform gyri, while subjective percept of
humanness was associated with activity in right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ). Social
identity moderated BOLD signal in both regions: the association between objective
humanness and fusiform was stronger for in-group members than out-group members and
in-group members were associated with a greater neural response to subjective percept of
mind in rTPJ. These results suggest dissociable neural bases of objective and subjective
humanness, and suggest that group membership impacts both types of processing in the
extended face network of the visual system and in regions associated with mentalizing. In a
final behavioral experiment, Democrats and Republicans who perceived the other party as
threatening had lenient thresholds for perceiving minds behind out-group faces
(Experiment 4). As such, the influence of social identity on mind perception may be due to
motivational concerns rather than mere categorization. In all, these experiments suggest that
mind perception is a dynamic process, dependent not only on reflexive responses to the
physical features of faces but also on the motivational influence of social identity and
identity threat.

Keynote

Distinguished Scholar Address
Friday, April 12, 2013
5:50 - 7:10 PM
Jennifer Beer, University of Texas, Austin
Presidential Address
Ralph Adolphs, California Institute of Technology
2013 Distinguished Scholar Award Winner

Session F

Emotion & Regulation
Saturday, April 13, 2013
9:00 - 10:15 AM
Kateri McRae, University of Denver
Louise Chim, Stanford University

* SANS Graduate Student Travel Award Winner

Hedy Kober, Yale Univesity
Bryan Denny, Columbia University

ABSTRACTS
INDIVIDUAL AND GROUP DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION Kateri McRae, University of
Denver; James J. Gross, Stanford University; Iris B. Mauss, University of California, Berkeley;
Leanne Williams, University of Sydney, Stanford University, Brain Resource; Kevin Ochsner,
Columbia University; Tchikima Davis, University of California, Berkeley; Danny Lumian,
University of California, Los Angeles; Pareezad Zarolia, University of Denver; Brett Ford,
University of California, Berkeley; William Rekshan, Brain Resource; Nicholas Cooper, Brain
Resource - Multiple studies have shown that individuals can use emotion regulation
strategies to change an emotional response. This has raised the important question of
whether individual and group differences in emotionality are due to differences in
emotional reactivity, emotion regulation, or both. In a series of studies, we have
demonstrated that several types of group differences can be better explained by differences
in emotion regulation than by differences in emotional reactivity. Differences in emotional
reactivity are measured by greater self-reported negative affect and greater activation in the
amygdala during a non-regulation condition. Differences in emotion regulation ability are
characterized by group differences in a) the down-regulation of self-reported negative affect
b) activation in the amygdala during cognitive reappraisal and c) the engagement of
prefrontal and parietal regions during reappraisal. Group differences in regulation, but not
reactivity, are present when considering gender differences, age differences as older
children develop into young adults, and individual differences in cognitive control. In
addition, emotion regulation may better discriminate between individuals who belong to
different clinical groups than emotional reactivity. Specifically, there is evidence that
emotion regulation predicts response to antidepressant medication in those with major
depressive disorder. In addition, individual differences in emotion regulation may better
predict non suicidal self-injurious behavior than emotional reactivity.
CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL RESPONSES TO CALM
AND EXCITED SMILES Louise Chim, Jeanne L. Tsai, Bo Kyung Park, Brian Knutson, Stanford
University - Although most people want to feel good, people from different cultures want to
feel good in different ways. Whereas European Americans want to feel excited and other
high arousal positive (HAP) states more than Chinese, Chinese want to feel calm and other
low arousal positive (LAP) states more than European Americans. What implications do
these cultural differences in “ideal affect” have for how people judge high and low arousal
smiles? We predicted that European Americans would rate high arousal smiles as more
friendly and better leaders than would Chinese, and that Chinese would rate low arousal
smiles as more friendly and better leaders than would European Americans. We tested these
hypotheses in Study 1. 43 European Americans and 45 Hong Kong Chinese rated 48
computer generated low, moderate, and high arousal smiles (varying in gender and race
[Asian, White]) along a number of traits. As predicted, European Americans rated the high
arousal smiles as more friendly and better leaders than did Hong Kong Chinese, while Hong
Kong Chinese rated the low arousal smiles as more friendly and better leaders than did

European Americans (ps < .05). These associations did not depend on gender or race of
target. Why might different cultures respond more favorably to different smiles? Three
levels of potential differences include: (1) visual/perceptual processing of expressions (e.g.,
valuing excitement makes people attend more to excited versus calm expressions), (2)
emotional processing of expressions (e.g., valuing excitement makes excited faces more
rewarding than calm faces), and/or (3) cognitive processing of expressions (e.g., valuing
excitement makes excited faces seem more self- or goal-relevant). To distinguish among
these possibilities, 13 European Americans and 10 Chinese international students studying
in the U.S. viewed faces from Study 1 during FMRI scanning, and rated the familiarity and
leadership potential of each. High arousal smiles elicited less nucleus accumbens activity
than low arousal smiles in Chinese but not European American participants, consistent with
a different affective response to low versus high arousal smiles. Groups did not differ in
neural responses to expressions, however, in the fusiform face area (associated with
perception), or the medial prefrontal cortex (associated with identity and reflection). These
findings suggest that Chinese found the high arousal versus low arousal smiles to be less
rewarding than did European American participants. These findings suggest that cultural
differences in ideal affect can influence peoples’ social inferences from emotional cues.
Chinese students rated faces showing excited (vs. calm) smiles as less friendly and worse
leaders than European Americans in Study 1, and showed less NAcc activation in response
to faces with excited (vs. calm) smiles in Study 2. Thus, cultural differences in ideal affect
may influence perception of emotional expressions at the level of affective experience, rather
than perception or identification. Associations of these responses with individual differences
in ideal affect will be discussed further.
MINDFUL-ACCEPTANCE MODULATES NEGATIVE EMOTION AND PHYSICAL
PAIN Hedy Kober, Yale University, Columbia University; Jason Buhle, Columbia University; Peter
Mende-Siedlecki, Princeton University; Jochen Weber, Columbia University; Brent Hughes, Stanford
University; Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University; Tor D. Wager, University of Colorado, Boulder Mindfulness has been an integral part of psychological and medical approaches to stress and
suffering for several decades. It is typically defined as a two-component construct that
includes (1) attention to present-moment experience and (2) a non-judgmental, accepting
attitude. Mindfulness has been demonstrated to ameliorate clinical and self-report measures
of depression and chronic pain, but whether it influences fundamental affective brain
processes or mainly judgment, decision-making, or reporting processes, remains unclear. In
this study, we trained 16 participants in mindfulness-based acceptance of negative emotion
and physical pain. We then exposed them to two kinds of stimuli: Negative and Neutral
visual images and Painful and Non-painful heat. On alternating blocks, we asked
participants to either react naturally (REACT instruction) or exercise mindful-acceptance
(ACCEPT instruction) in the presence of these stimuli. Mindful acceptance was associated
with a significant reduction in reported negative affect for both negative images and painful
heat. In addition, mindful-acceptance significantly reduced amygdala responses to negative
images. Mindful-acceptance was also associated with a significant reduction in reported
pain as well as heat-evoked responses in both medial and lateral pain systems, including
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, anterior and posterior insula, thalamus, and S2.
Furthermore, classification analysis on pain trials snowed that acceptance significantly
reduced activity in a distributed, a priori pattern established in previous studies as a
biomarker for experimental pain. Taken together, these findings suggest that mindfulacceptance can reduce reactivity to aversive events in a modality-specific manner. Its effects
appear to extend beyond judgment, decision-making, and self report to influence affective
brain processes in neurobiologically-meaningful ways.
WHAT DETERMINES WHETHER THE EFFECTS OF EMOTION REGULATION WILL
LAST? Bryan T. Denny, Columbia University; Marika Inhoff, New York University; Noam
Zerubavel, Columbia University; Lila Davachi, New York University; Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia
University - Cognitive reappraisal has been shown to effectively regulate negative emotion
via recruitment of prefrontal control systems to down-regulate activity in the amygdala.
Little is known, however, about how long these regulatory effects last or what factors - like
regulation practice - determine their durability. In the present study, healthy adult
participants viewed aversive stimuli during fMRI scanning. On baseline Look trials
participants simply viewed images and responded naturally. On Reappraise trials

participants viewed pictured scenes from a psychologically distant and objective
perspective. To examine the effects of prior exposure and practice on reappraisal ability, the
day before scanning participants viewed half of the images and either Looked at or
Reappraised each one three times. For the other half of the images, they either Looked at or
Reappraised them in the scanner for the first time. To address the durability of regulation,
participants passively viewed brief re-presentations of these stimuli in the scanner one week
after completion of the reappraisal task. Behaviorally, we found that reappraisal was
effective at diminishing negative emotion, particularly for repeatedly reappraised stimuli.
Neurally, during the reappraisal task, both amygdala and left VLPFC showed effects that
mirrored affect reports: activity decreased as a function of both Reappraisal and prior
exposure/practice with stimuli for amygdala, and increased for VLPFC. One week later,
only for Reappraisal practice trials was sustained attenuation of right amygdala activity
observed, without a corresponding interaction in PFC activity. Overall, these results suggest
that neural reactivity drives the sustained effects of reappraisal practice.

Keynote

Communicating Social Neuroscience
Saturday, April 13, 2013
10:35 – 12:05 PM
Tal Yarkoni, University of Colorado Boulder
* 2013 SANS Innovation Award Winner

Rebecca Ferrer, National Cancer Institute
Philip Fisher, University of Oregon and the Oregon Social Learning Center
Jamil Zaki, Stanford University

ABSTRACTS
SCIENCE COMMUNICATION SIGNS UP FOR INTERNET SERVICE: WHAT
TWITTER, ARXIV, AND REDDIT CAN DO FOR SOCIAL AND AFFECTIVE
NEUROSCIENCE
Tal Yarkoni, Ph.D., University of Colorado Boulder
Many subfields of psychology and neuroscience are currently experience something of a
crisis of confidence, but it is not immediately clear what researchers can or should do to
improve the situation. In this talk, I argue that rather than developing standardized
checklists, creating null result journals, or encouraging replication efforts, our best collective
hope for improving the quality of our science lies in dramatically increasing utilization of
new online platforms and social media services. I discuss a number of limitations of current
publishing practices that could be ameliorated by adopting a more rapid, open, and less
formal approach to the communication and evaluation of scientific products. Suggested
solutions range from the relatively trivial (tweeting and blogging more) to the somewhat
grand (abandoning pre-publication review). I argue that such developments stand to have
large benefits for social and affective neuroscientists in the long run, and urge researchers to
invest the minimal effort required to speed the transition along.

COMMUNICATING SOCIAL AND AFFECTIVE NEUROSCIENCE PROJECTS TO THE
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH (NIH)
Rebecca Ferrer, Basic Biobehavioral and Psychological Sciences Branch, National Cancer Institute
Using the National Cancer Institute (NCI) as an example, this talk will present an “insider”
perspective on framing social and affective neuroscience research proposals in the context of
NIH funding priorities. I will discuss social and affective science research priorities in the
Basic Biobehavioral and Psychological Sciences Branch (at the NCI), which seeks to
stimulate research that facilitates a better understanding of psychological processes and
biobehavioral mechanisms that underlie cancer decisions, behaviors, and biological
processes in order to inform future applied cancer research. In addition, I will discuss ways
in which more basic and affective neuroscience questions can be examined in a cancer
context or framed in the context of NCI priorities. The presentation will also feature tips
about the NIH funding process that can facilitate an application’s successful navigation
through peer review and programmatic prioritization. Finally, other Institutes at NIH with
interest in social and affective neuroscience will be highlighted.
COMMUNICATING EFECTIVELY TO GENERAL AUDIENCES ABOUT
TRANSLATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE: LESSONS FROM THE LAND OF TOXIC
STRESS
Philip Fisher, University of Oregon and the Oregon Social Learning Center
The increase in public interest in neuroscience has created a “seller’s market” for brain
research, in which scientific information is likely to be embraced enthusiastically and
uncritically by general audiences. This has made it much easier to disseminate important
findings outside of academic settings, but it has also introduced a number of challenges. In
particular, there can be a tendency for misinformation to be promulgated (especially when it
is consistent with preconceived or cultural beliefs), and even valid scientific findings can be
overgeneralized or miscommunicated. This talk will focus on the issues in scientific
communication in one area: Research on how early adverse experiences shape the
developing brain, and what to do to mitigate neurobiological vulnerabilities arising from
early life stress. Examples of both opportunities and challenges will be provided, based on
the author’s using materials developed at the Harvard Center on the Developing Child, that
include the conceptual framework of “toxic stress.”
PUT YOUR MOUTH WHERE YOUR MONEY IS: THE IMPORTANCE OF
COMMUNICATING SOCIAL NEUROSCIENCE
Jamil Zaki, Stanford University
In recent years, social neuroscience—and psychology more generally—has developed a
bipolar relationship with the public. On the one hand, the findings of our research are
communicated through the popular press more quickly and broadly than ever, often being
simplified and sensationalized beyond recognition in the process. On the other hand, our
field has come under unprecedented scrutiny following new focus on problematic
methodological choices, and this criticism joins an alarming dismissal of social sciences
within large and important sectors of the public. In both cases, scientists rightfully take
offense: either to uncritical characterizations of their work or careless denials of its
importance. In this talk, I will argue that the onus is on us, as our field’s practitioners, to
address these problems by directly communicating about our work to the public. Such
communication can be implemented in simple ways that will benefit both our field and
consumers of popular science in a number of ways. From the scientist’s point of view, direct
communication allows us to curate the ways in which our work is described, maximizing
accuracy and transparency. From the public’s point of view, it affords a peek into the
scientific process (and not just its end products), and makes the relevance of our work
abundantly clear. I will propose two simple ideas—“pop abstracts” and science writing
workshops—that could provide first steps towards a broadly communicative social
neuroscience, and close with the recognition that communication is a vital form of teaching
we should think of as at least somewhat of a responsibility.

Session G

Health & Risk Behaviors
Saturday, April 13, 2013
1:30 – 2:45 PM
Amanda S. Bruce, University of Missouri-Kansas City
Emily B. Falk, University of Michigan
Gideon Nave, Caltech
Keely A. Muscatell, University of California, Los Angeles

ABSTRACTS
FOOD FOR THOUGHT: SELF-CONTROL, WEIGHT LOSS, AND THE BRAIN Amanda
Bruce, University of Missouri-Kansas City; Jared Bruce, University of Missouri-Kansas City;
Rebecca Lepping, University of Kansas; Steven Malley, Malley Surgical Weight Loss Center; Joseph
E. Donnelly, University of Kansas Medical Center; Cary Savage, University of Kansas Medical
Center - The great prevalence and grim consequences of obesity make it one of the most
serious health concerns facing industrialized nations. Many studies document the improved
health outcomes associated with even small amounts of weight loss. Bariatric surgery and
behavioral interventions can both result in successful weight-loss. Few studies have
examined functional brain changes in response to effective, purposeful weight loss and yet
none have compared different methods of intervention. Here we compare functional brain
changes associated with a behavioral weight loss intervention with those associated with
bariatric surgery. Fifteen obese participants were recruited prior to adjustable gastric
banding surgery and fifteen obese participants were recruited prior to a behavioral diet
weight loss intervention. The groups were matched for demographics (age, sex, educational
attainment) and amount of weight lost in the intervention (surgical M = 10%; diet M = 11%).
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans were conducted before and 12 weeks
after intervention. At each time, participants were scanned while hungry and immediately
following a standardized meal. During the fMRI scans, participants viewed blocks of food,
nonfood (animals) and blurred baseline control images. Behavioral weight loss participants
demonstrated increased activity in right medial prefrontal cortex and bariatric weight loss
participants demonstrated decreased activity in this region [max voxel 6, 50, 19; t = 3.72; 8
contiguous voxels; p < .01, corrected]. This could be due to the requirement for greater selfcontrol in a strict behavioral diet program. In a sense, it may be that the bariatric participants
have the “self-control” surgically placed as a laparoscopic band, thus not needing the extra
cognitive control in the form of cortical inhibition. When hungry, diet participants also
showed significantly greater increases from pre to post intervention in left precuneus when
compared to bariatric patients. Medial PFC and precuneus may be working together to
facilitate both increased cognitive control and improved self-monitoring for the behavioral
diet participants. It is possible that continual monitoring of the self helps facilitate selfcontrol, though further research is needed. When participants in this study were scanned
after eating, findings indicated increases in bilateral temporal cortex activity in bariatric
participants compared to behavioral diet participants. Activations in middle temporal
cortex are commonly reported in studies of food motivation and are associated with higher
level perception including visual and semantic processing. It is possible that food cues are
more salient and stimulating for those who have undergone a more restrictive weight loss
procedure (such as a surgery). Overall, we demonstrated that functional brain changes
observed following behavioral diets are not due to decreased body mass alone, but appear
to be associated with the process by which weight loss is achieved.

WHY IS SOCIAL INFLUENCE SUCH A POWERFUL DETERMINANT OF HUMAN
BEHAVIOR? NEURAL PREDICTORS OF SUSCEPTIBILITY TO PEER INFLUENCE IN
ADOLESCENCE Emily B. Falk, University of Michigan; Christopher N. Cascio, University of
Michigan; Matthew O'Donnell, University of Michigan; Frank Tinney, University of Michigan; Joe
Bayer, University of Michigan; Kristin Shumaker, University of Michigan; Josh Carp, University of
Michigan; Anuj Pradhan, NICHD; Marie-Claude Ouimet, University of Sherbrooke; Jean Shope,
University of Michigan; Ray Bingham, University of Michigan; Bruce Simons-Morton, NICHD The opinions and behaviors of others powerfully shape our own. These effects are
particularly strong in adolescence. This has important everyday consequences; for example,
auto crashes are the leading cause of death in teens, and occur significantly more often in the
presence of teen passengers. Yet the neural mechanisms of peer influence in adolescence are
not well understood. This presentation will review convergent evidence suggesting that
among adolescents, neural sensitivity to social rewards and punishments is associated with
susceptibility to social influence. I will focus on data from two recent large-scale
neuroimaging studies of peer influence in adolescents. These studies demonstrate that
neural activity in systems associated with the distress of exclusion (anterior insula [AI],
subgenual cingulate cortex [subgenACC], dorsal anterior cingulate cortex [dACC]), as well
as with mentalizing (dorsomedial prefrontal cortex [DMPFC], temporoparietal junction
[TPJ], temporal pole [TP]), and reward (ventral striatum, orbitofrontal cortex) predict
susceptibility to diverse forms of social influence. In the first study, male teens (n=46, ages
16-17) rated mobile game applications prior to an fMRI scan. In the subsequent scan, they
received feedback about how their peers rated the game apps, and were given an
opportunity to re-rate the games. Separately, we identified neural activity associated with
being excluded by peers using the game Cyberball. Neural activity during the app-rating
task increased when receiving feedback that the group’s opinion differed from the
participant’s initial opinion in anatomically defined regions of interest (ROIs) encompassing
social pain and mentalizing systems, as well as in functionally defined ROIs identified based
on exclusion > inclusion in Cyberball. Activity within these systems, and the reward
system, also predicted changing one’s behavior to conform with peers. These effects were
most pronounced when peers ostensibly rated the games lower than the participants’ initial
ratings, but were modulated by the size and density of participants’ online social networks.
In a second study, we examined the hypothesis that individual differences in neural
sensitivity to exclusion predispose adolescents to be susceptible to risky peer influence.
Increased sensitivity to social and emotional cues may prompt teens to try to preemptively
attempt to fit in by taking risks in the presence of peers. In this study, male teens (n=43,
ages 16-17) experienced inclusion and exclusion in the game Cyberball in an fMRI session.
One week later, they drove alone and with a peer-confederate in a fixed-based driving
simulator. Individual differences in activity in anatomically-defined ROIs within social pain
(AI, dACC, subgenACC) and mentalizing (DMPFC, rTPJ) systems during exclusion
predicted susceptibility to risky social influence during the subsequent driving session, and
did so above and beyond self-reports of susceptibility to peer influence and distress during
exclusion. These results: 1) highlight the role of socio-emotional brain systems in social
influence; 2) contribute to our understanding of key processes relevant to social and
emotional function in the adolescent brain; and 3) illustrate an approach to linking neural
activity in specific, hypothesized ROIs to outcomes beyond the neuroimaging lab.
VASOPRESSIN FACILITATES RISKY COLLABORATION IN HUMANS Claudia
Brunnlieb, University Magdeburg, University Lübeck; Gideon Nave, Caltech; Colin Camerer,
Caltech; Bodo Vogt, University Magdeburg; Claus Tempelmann, University Magdeburg; Thomas F.
Münte , University Lübeck; Marcus Heldmann, University Lübeck, University Magdeburg Animal studies have shown that neuropeptide Arginine Vasopressin (AVP) facilitates social
behaviors such as pair bonding and paternal behavior. In humans, AVP was linked to
marital satisfaction, attachment security, social words detection and charitable giving.
However, there is little evidence about the role of AVP in human strategic interactions.
Based on the above-mentioned findings, we hypothesized that AVP would enhance partnerspecific cooperative behavior. In our double blind study, 34 healthy male participants
received either intranasal AVP (20 IU) or Placebo, and their brain activity was recorded in
the fMRI scanner. Participants played variations of a 2x2 Stag-hunt game with a fixed
partner (no feedback). In the game, players choose between a cooperative strategy (A) and a
non-cooperative strategy (B). The game has two pure equilibriums: payoff-dominant, in

which both players choose A, and risk-dominant, in which both players choose B. The
optimal strategy in the game depends on one’s belief about his partner’s action: when
believing that the partner would choose A with a probability that is greater than a certain
threshold, one should choose A as well; otherwise, B is a safer option that secures a higher
worst-case payoff (according to the max-min criteria). The rate in which players select the
collaborative strategy A is, therefore, a measure for one’s willingness to take a social risk,
and implies a greater belief that his partner would also choose to collaborate. Our behavioral
results show that AVP subjects selected the cooperative strategy significantly more times
than the placebo group, for every given belief threshold. Furthermore, the AVP subjects
responded significantly faster when choosing A than when choosing B. The opposite effect
was observed in the placebo group, where responses were significantly faster when
choosing the risk dominant strategy B. Our fMRI results showed a significant drug (AVP,
Placebo) x strategic choice (cooperative strategy, non-cooperative strategy) interaction in the
left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), a brain area known to be involved in the
encoding of anticipated risk during decision-making. Under AVP treatment the BOLD
signal in the DLPFC was significantly diminished during the choice of the cooperative
strategy. The opposite effect occurred during the choice of the non-cooperative strategy,
where AVP treatment resulted in an increased BOLD-signal in the left DLPFC BOLD-signal
relative to the Placebo group. These findings imply a relation between AVP treatment and
the perceived risk of each strategy; AVP subjects perceived the cooperative strategy as less
risky (implying a stronger belief that their partner would collaborate), whereas Placebo
subjects perceived the non-cooperative strategy as less risky (implying a belief that their
partner would not cooperate). Our findings provide behavioral (choice, response times) as
well as neural evidence for the role of AVP in human cooperative behavior. AVP
strengthens one’s belief that his partner would collaborate, and as a result increases one’s
willingness to take a social risk for the benefits of mutual collaboration.
SOCIAL STRESS AND THE DORSOMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX: THE DARK
SIDE OF MENTALIZING? Keely A. Muscatell & Naomi I. Eisenberger, UCLA - Social
stressors, such as experiencing social evaluation or being low in social status, are associated
with a variety of negative outcomes, including poorer physical health and well-being.
Behavioral research suggests that perceptions of threat, feelings of evaluation, and selfconscious emotions may all play a role in linking social stressors with negative outcomes.
However, the mechanisms by which social stressors are represented in the brain and
translated into physiological processes important for health are largely unknown. In this
presentation, converging lines of research suggesting a key role for the dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) in responding to social stressors will be discussed. Specifically, I
will present data from three studies showing that: 1) DMPFC activity during social
evaluation is associated with decreased self-esteem, 2) DMPFC activity during a
perspective-taking task and a social threat task is associated with lower social status, and 3)
DMPFC activity during social evaluation is associated with increases in immune system
activation. Together, these data suggest that, in certain contexts and for certain individuals,
attending to the thoughts and feelings of others may be associated with negative emotions,
lower feelings of self-worth, and heightened physiological activation. In other words, while
the bulk of research in social cognitive neuroscience has focused on the positive side of
mentalizing and perspective-taking, the research presented demonstrates that mentalizing
may have dark side as well.

Session H

Poster Presentations: Session 2
Saturday, April 13, 2013
2:45 – 4:15 PM

Session I

Clinical Applications & Connectivity
Saturday, April 13, 2013
4:35 – 5:50 PM

Rachel Ellis, University of Melbourne & Murdoch Children's Research Institute
* OUP Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Student Travel Award Winner

Jeffrey M. Spielberg, University of California, Berkeley
Josh Carlson, Stony Brook University
Wesley Moons, University of California, Davis

ABSTRACTS
BRAIN CONNECTIVITY NETWORKS AND AFFECTIVE DISORDERS IN
ADOLESCENCE Rachel Ellis, University of Melbourne & Murdoch Children's Research Institute;
Nicholas Allen, University of Melbourne; Marc Seal, Murdoch Children's Research Institute Research Question: What is the relationship between the development of structural
connectivity in the adolescent brain and the emergence of psychopathology? Background:
Emotional regulation, which has been linked to risk for affective disorders such as
depression, depends on connectivity between frontal and limbic regions of the brain. White
matter tracts support structural connectivity in the brain, and alterations in their integrity
are implicated in a range of psychological disorders. This study uses diffusion-weighted
imaging of white matter development in a cohort of adolescents to investigate the
relationship between brain connectivity patterns and the emergence of psychopathology.
Methods: 145 neurologically healthy adolescents were recruited from a random selection of
Melbourne schools. Diffusion weighted MRI images were acquired, and used to perform
white matter tractography and brain network analysis. Key topological properties of the
resulting connectivity networks were identified and compared across individuals.
Participants completed a self-report measure of depressive symptomatology. Preliminary
results: Brain network topology continues to develop between the ages of 16 and 18, and
higher global efficiency may be linked to higher levels of depressive symptoms. Analysis of
local connections implicates connectivity between the rostral anterior cingulate and
thalamus in the development of depressive symptoms.
PUBERTAL INCREASES IN TESTOSTERONE INFLUENCE AMYGDALAORBITOFRONTAL COUPLING Jeffrey M. Spielberg, University of California, Berkeley; Thomas
M. Olino, University of Pittsburgh; Erika E. Forbes, University of Pittsburgh; Cecile D. Ladouceur,
University of Pittsburgh; Neal D. Ryan, University of Pittsburgh; Ronald E. Dahl, University of
California, Berkeley - Adolescence is characterized by complex changes in social and affective
processing including puberty-associated increases in reward processing, threat processing,
and emotional reactivity (Crone & Dahl 2012). These changes appear to contribute to
difficulties regulating emotions (and affective disorders) in adolescence. Take together these
pubertal changes in affective processing can appear somewhat paradoxical: pubertal
maturation is associated with both 1) increases in “boldness” (including greater sensationseeking and risk-taking) and 2) increases in anxiety (Cohen et al., 1993; Grunbaum et al.,
2002) and reactivity to threat (e.g., increased fear-potentiated startle, Quevedo et al., 2009).
Given the long term health impact of both sides of this paradox (i.e., increased
anxiety/depression as well as the negative trajectories from adolescent risky and reckless
behavior; Dahl, 2004), it is crucial to achieve a deeper understanding of the mechanisms by
which increased reactivity to threat emerges during puberty. Emerging evidence suggests
that puberty-linked increases in amygdala activation to threat form an important link in this
mechanism (Moore et al., 2012; Spielberg et al., in prep). However, the neural mechanisms
by which puberty increases amygdala reactivity to threat remain unresolved. Given that
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is heavily interconnected with amygdala (Cohen et al., 2008) and
is thought to exert top-down modulation of amygdala value representations (Dolan, 2007),
decoupling of amygdala and OFC may lead to increased amygdala reactivity. Emerging
research in adults indicates that testosterone decreases amygdala-OFC coupling, providing
one mechanism by which puberty may lead to greater amygdala reactivity (Bos et al., 2012;
van Wingen et al., 2010; Volman et al., 2011). However, no study to date has examined the

impact of testosterone on amygdala-OFC coupling during adolescence, the period in which
testosterone undergoes dramatic increases. Thus, it remains unclear whether this decoupling
contributes to the increased amygdala reactivity observed in adolescence. The present study
tested the hypothesis that puberty-linked increases in amygdala reactivity to threat are
related to decreased top-down modulation of amygdala by OFC. To test this hypothesis,
functional magnetic resonance imaging data were collected at two time points (2 years
apart) in a sample of 41 typically developing adolescents who viewed stimuli associated
with potential threat (i.e., faces with anger or fear expressions). In order to assess the impact
of testosterone on amygdala-OFC coupling, longitudinal changes in endogenous
testosterone were correlated with variation over time in condition-dependent amygdalaOFC connectivity (i.e., psychophysiological interaction [PPI]). In line with hypotheses,
increased testosterone over time was associated with decreased PPI connectivity between
amygdala and right OFC over time. Specifically, individuals with a large increase in
testosterone exhibited positive connectivity during the threat condition between amygdala
and right OFC at Time 1, and these regions became decoupled at Time 2. Thus, present
findings support the hypothesis that drastic changes in testosterone during adolescence are
associated with decoupling of amygdala and OFC, which, in turn, may lead to reduced topdown regulation of amygdala by right OFC. These changes may contribute to the somewhat
paradoxical changes, which include increased emotional reactivity, threat reactivity, and
risk-taking associated with pubertal maturation.
FEELING LOST: DISRUPTED BRAIN-BASED TRACKING OF DYNAMIC AFFECTIVE
STATES IN ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION Josh Carlson, Stony Brook University; Denis
Rubin, Stony Brook University; Lilianne Mujica-Parodi, Stony Brook University - Emotional states
are complex multi-dimensional phenomena that continuously evolve as we interact with the
environment. Studying the brain basis of dynamic emotional states may be particularly
important for understanding disorders such as anxiety and depression, which are
characterized by abnormal affective states including prolonged and unexplainable worry
and despair. Yet, the neural system that supports dynamic fluctuations in emotional state is
unknown and it is further unknown how this system might be compromised in disorders of
anxiety and depression. We hypothesized that areas of the brain, which support dynamic
shifts in affective state, should display activity that correlates with experienced affect. We
further hypothesized that, compared to healthy controls, individuals with anxiety and
depression would display weaker correlations between activity in this network and their
experienced affect. To test this hypothesis, patients with generalized anxiety disorder
(N=17), major depressive disorder (N=15), those comorbid for anxiety and depression
(N=15), and a sample of healthy controls (N=13) viewed the pilot episode of ABC\'s TVseries “Lost” (42min) while fMRI data were acquired. This episode follows a group of plane
crash survivors who are stranded on an unknown island and are forced to deal with a
number of emotional challenges ranging from crash-related deaths and injuries to other
mysterious threats encountered on the island. Immediately after viewing the episode,
participants rated their experienced emotional arousal and valence levels on a nine-point
scale for each of the 200 scenes in the episode. Across all individuals fluctuations in reported
arousal were correlated with widespread activity in the occipital lobe, posterior parietal
cortex, precuneus, supplementary motor area, dorsomedial and dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, caudate, amygdala, anterior insula, and anterior cingulate. Similarly, fluctuations in
valence were associated with activity in the precuneus, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex,
caudate, amygdala, anterior insula, and anterior cingulate. Valence also correlated with
areas not linked to arousal such as the posterior cingulate, superior temporal gyrus, fusiform
gyrus, and anterior temporal pole. Anxious and depressed individuals displayed weaker
brain-based tracking of valence within this network, including the amygdala, anterior
cingulate, posterior cingulate, and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex. Thus, our results provide
evidence for a large-scale brain-based network in which activation correlates with variation
in the valence and arousal components of emotional state. Of particular interest, we find
specific abnormalities in patients with anxiety and depression within this network. This
abnormality in brain-based tracking of affective states may result in a lost representation of
one’s feelings, which provides a putative basis for disorder-related symptoms such as
unexplainable worry and despair.

ANXIETY CAUSES GREATER INFLAMMATORY ACTIVITY THAN ANGER Wesley G.
Moons, University of California, Davis - Acute stressors elicit systemic inflammatory activity.
There are at least two adaptive reasons for psychological stressors to elicit an inflammatory
response. First, preemptive activation of the immune response can facilitate healing of
subsequently sustained injury or infection. Thus, when stressors signal that future injury is
likely, an inflammatory response would be beneficial. Second, an inflammatory response in
anticipation of future challenges or threats presumably produce behaviors that enhance
dealing with those challenges or threats. For example, sickness behaviors produce
withdrawal and social avoidance behavior that may encourage distancing from a perceived
danger. Thus, when stressors signal that certain situations or individuals are best avoided,
an inflammatory response could enhance appropriate avoidance of that danger. General
models of stress posit a mostly undifferentiated physiological response to stressors, which
includes a spike in inflammatory activity. However, not all stressful situations present
equivalent likelihood of potential injury and a related need for avoidance. For example,
feeling angry is a common response to some stressors, but anger is associated with
appraisals of relatively great levels of control and a sense of certainty or confidence. Further,
anger promotes approach behavior such as aggression toward the stressor perhaps because
angry people perceive less risk of injury. In such situations, an inflammatory response may
be irrelevant because the stressor is seemingly manageable, the perceived chance of injury is
low, and there is little motivation to avoid the stressor. In contrast, avoidance emotions like
anxiety and fear strongly indicate a threatening and potentially overwhelming stressor. Such
reactions are commonly associated with a sense of little control over one’s environment.
Consequently, these emotions are accompanied by a powerful motivation to withdraw from
potentially harmful stimuli. In such situations, an inflammatory response that further
promotes avoidance and prepares the body to deal with potential injury could be
particularly adaptive. An experiment was conducted to provide causal evidence that the
avoidance emotion of anxiety produces an inflammatory response, whereas the approach
emotion of anger produces less or no inflammatory reaction. Forty men and women were
provided oral mucosal transudate (OMT) samples from which the proinflammatory
cytokines interferon-Œ≥ (IFN-Œ≥), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-1Œ≤ (IL-1Œ≤) were
assayed as markers of inflammatory activity. Participants’ heart rate (HR) was also assessed
at baseline and continuously throughout the experiment. Participants completed a guided
writing emotion induction in which they wrote about a situation that made them feel either
very anxious or very angry. Twenty minutes after the essay completion, participants
provided a second OMT sample from which post-induction cytokine levels were assessed.
Participants in both conditions showed an equivalent and significant increase in HR from
baseline while they were writing their emotion induction essays. This indicated that a
similar level of physiological arousal was obtained in both emotion conditions. Despite this
similarity, only participants in the anxiety condition showed an increase in the mean levels
of the inflammatory markers IFN-Œ≥ and IL-1Œ≤, but not IL-6. Participants in the anger
condition showed no sign of inflammatory reactivity. Participants’ self-reported postinduction anxiety levels, controlling for baseline levels, were also significantly correlated
with IFN-Œ≥, IL-1Œ≤, and IL-6, but self-reported anger was not. The results support a
model in which avoidance emotions cause notable inflammatory reactivity, whereas
approach emotions do not. Limiting inflammatory responses to situations in which immune
activity may be most beneficial is likely both adaptive and helpful in conserving resources
for generating immune reactivity when only most necessary. These results indicate that not
all stress responses are created equal and that distinct patterns of emotional responding to
stressors mediate inflammatory reactivity.

Session J

Poster Presentations: Session 3
Saturday, April 13, 2013
5:50 - 7:20 PM

Poster Session D
Friday, April 12, 2:45-4:15pm
D-01
DOES
JOINT
ATTENTION
FACILITATE
SPONTANEOUS FACIAL MIMICRY? Janina Neufeld,
University of Reading; Sebastian Korb, University of
Wisconsin; Christina Ioannou, University of Reading; Garret
O'Connell, University of Reading; Etienne Roesch, University
of Reading; Leo Schilbach, Max-Planck-Institute for
Neurological Research; Bhismadev Chakrabarti, University of
Reading - Spontaneous facial mimicry may reflect a key
component of empathy, i.e. emotional contagion
(Niedenthal, 2007). Another key component of empathy is
cognitive empathy or theory of mind, that is involved in
understanding mental states of others. Joint attention is a
reliable predictor of theory of mind from early childhood
(Charman et al., 2000). However, it is not known if and
how these two components of empathy (i.e. joint attention
and spontaneous facial mimicry) interact with each other.
While eye contact per se is known to increase facial
mimicry (Schrammel et al 2009), it does not constitute
joint attention, which involves the social coordination of
visual attention towards an aspect of the environment. To
create the subjective experience of joint attention in an
experimentally controlled way, we used an interactive
paradigm involving eye-tracking. The paradigm uses face
stimuli of virtual characters, whose gaze behaviour is
determined in real time by the gaze behaviour of the
participant (Wilms et al., 2010). The task had a 2 x 2
design, with the virtual character either engaging in joint
attention or not, and displaying a happy as compared to a
disgusted facial expression. The virtual character and
participant engaged (or not) in joint attention to one of
two simultaneously presented neutral objects matched for
luminance and colour. This was instantiated by
establishing mutual gaze between the participant and the
virtual character prior to the virtual character shifting
gaze to one of the two objects. This was followed by the
virtual character producing a facial expression and
looking back at the participant. Facial EMG was recorded
simultaneously from the participants throughout the
experiment. Spontaneous facial mimicry was measured
by indexing the facial EMG response for the duration of
the facial expression made by the virtual character.
Preliminary results from 10 adults (4 males) from the
general population show a greater response in the
zygomaticus major for happy compared to disgust
expressions of the virtual character, indicating emotioncongruent spontaneous facial mimicry. There is a trend
for greater spontaneous facial mimicry in trials with joint
attention compared to those without. Future analysis will
include more participants as they continue to be recruited,
and test the nature and magnitude of the relationship
between joint attention and spontaneous facial mimicry.
In addition, it will test the impact of individual
differences in autistic traits on the link between these two
components of empathy.

D-02
THE ROLE OF GENETIC VARIATIONS OF IMMUNE
SYSTEM REGULATORY MOLECULES CD28 AND
CTLA-4
IN
COGNITIVE
FUNCTIONING
IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA Dorota Frydecka, Wroclaw Medical
University; Lidia Karabon, Polish Academy of Sciences; Edyta
Pawlak-Adamska, Polish Academy of Sciences; Anna Jele,
Wroclaw Medical University; Andrzej Kiejna, Wroclaw
Medical University - Background: Genetic factors that
modulate the immune response have been implicated as
risk factors both for schizophrenia as well as for cognitive
impairments, which are considered to be endophenotypes
of schizophrenia, i.e. subclinical, heritable and
independent of clinical state traits associated with genetic
susceptibility. Regulation of immune response is
mediated by two related receptors: CTLA-4 and CD28,
which mediate differentially T-cell activity. CD28 is a
major co-stimulator, whereas CTLA-4 performs negative
regulatory functions. The level of activation of immune
response depends on the balance between co-stimulatory
and inhibitory signals. One of the key mechanisms
leading to immune dysregulation is the expression of the
regulatory molecules due to their genes polymorphisms.
Aim: The study was carried out to investigate the
association between polymorphisms of the CTLA-4 gene
(49A/G, -319C/T, CT60 A/G) and CD28 gene (+17C/T)
and frontal lobe functions in patients with schizophrenia.
Methods: 118 patients diagnosed with schizophrenia
according to ICD-10 criteria and 352 controls were
included in the study. The participants were evaluated
for lifetime symptomatology using the Operational
Criteria for Psychotic Illness Checklist (OPCRIT).
Cognitive functions were assessed by performance on the
most commonly administered measures of frontal lobe
functioning: Trail Making Test (TMT) and Stroop Color
Word Interference Test (SCWT). TMT-A involves
connecting numbers in succession, while TMT-B requires
subjects to connect numbers and letters alternately in
successive order. TMT-A requires mainly visuoperceptual
abilities, TMT-B reflects primarily working memory and
secondarily task-switching ability, while the difference
between TMT-B and TMT-A score provides an indicator
of executive control function. Stroop Test involves
reading printed color names when the name of the color is
printed in a color not denoted by the name, thus allowing
to measure the ability to inhibit a prepotent response
tendency. Results: There was no significant difference in
distribution of genotypes in the polymorphisms of CTLA4 gene between patients and controls. However, there
were significant differences (p=0,0007) in distribution of
genotypes of CD28 gene between group of patients and
controls (CC: 2% vs. 1%, CT:41 vs 23%, TT: 58% vs. 76%
respectively). Patients performed significantly below the
norms for general population on both TMT A and TMT-B
tests. There were no significant differences between
patients with respect to CTLA-4 and CD28 gene
polymorphisms in TMT-A and TMT-B scores. However,
with respect to +17C/T CD28 gene polymorphism there
was a trend level difference: C allel carriers (CC and/or
CT genotype) performed worse that T allel carriers (TT
genotype) (p=0,054), suggesting weaker executive control
function. Additionally, there were no significant

differences among patients with respect to CTLA-4 and
CD28 gene polymorphisms and performance on Stroop
Test. Conclusions: Our data support a role of CD28 +17
C/T gene polymorphisms for the predisposition to
schizophrenia according to ICD-10 criteria. Moreover, in
the group of patients the distribution of genotypes of
CD28 gene polymorphism is similar that found in patients
with autoimmune disorders such as: early onset type 1
diabetes and Behçet’s disease. Additionally, +17C/T
CD28 gene polymorphism might be considered as a risk
factor for cognitive impairment in schizophrenia.
D-03
REAPPRAISAL CHOICE ENHANCES ABILITY TO
UPREGULATE POSITIVE AFFECT Bruce Dore, Columbia
University; Kevin Ochnser, Columbia University - Although
an extensive literature shows the benefits of choice and
control for psychological well-being, no prior studies
have assessed the impact of active choice on emotion
regulation effectiveness. We conducted a behavioral
study to investigate whether actively choosing to
reappraise a stimulus will lead participants to reappraise
more effectively than those given no opportunity for
choice. Participants (n=80) were trained to use a
positivity-enhancing ('Make Positive') or a negativitydampening ('Make Neutral') reappraisal strategy before
viewing a series of image trials for which they either
chose to reappraise or look naturally (Choice condition),
or were yoked to the choices of a previous participant
(NoChoice condition). All participants made affect ratings
for each trial on unipolar positive and negative affect
scales. Results reveal a reappraisal strategy by choice
interaction such that choice conferred a benefit for the
Make Positive strategy but not for the Make Neutral
strategy. Additionally, Make Positive choice preference
correlated negatively with individual differences in
rumination tendency, as assessed by the Ruminative
Responses Scale. These findings shed light on the
importance of motivational factors for reappraisal efficacy
and suggest a connection between chronic preferences for
rumination and positive reappraisal.
D-04
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL DISCOUNTING
Tina Strombach, University of Dusseldorf; Bernd Weber,
University Hospital Bonn; Peter Kenning, Zeppelin
University; Philippe Tobler, University of Zurich; Tobias
Kalenscher, University of Dusseldorf - Objective: Sharing is
rewarding. And sharing with close friends or family is
more rewarding than sharing with strangers. Previous
studies have shown that generosity levels decline
hyperbolically across social distance, a process dubbed
social discounting (Jones and Rachlin, Psych Science,
2006), and that sharing money with close others recruits
dopaminergic reward brain regions more robustly than
sharing the same amount with distant others (Fareri et al.,
J Neurosci, 2012). We therefore hypothesized that the
social-distance-dependentother-regarding utility, i.e., how
much subjects value increasing the wealth of another
person at social distance X, is associated with activity in
reward-related value areas. Methods: We studied the

neural correlates of social discounting by adapting a
social decision making task by Jones and Rachlin (2006).
While lying in the MR scanner, subjects made 160
decisions. In the experiment social distance was
transformed into a scale consisting of 100 icons,
representing the social distance between the participant
and the other person. In each trial, participants had to
choose between a selfish and a generous option, yielding
a large reward for the participant alone, or smaller
rewards for the participant and another individual at the
specified social distance. For each social distance level, we
determined the point at which the subjects were
indifferent between being generous and selfish by
titrating the selfish reward magnitude, revealing how
much money they are willing to forego to give a reward
to the other person. These points were then used to
econometrically reconstruct the other-regarding utility of
giving a specified sum of money to a person at social
distance X. Results: We present preliminary data of 16
subjects. Half of the subjects (n=8) were used to identify
brain regions responsive to making generous decisions.
This localizer task identified the anterior PFC, dlPFC,
vmPFC and Caudate/vStr, being significantly more active
when deciding in favor of the generous option. In the
other half of the subjects (n=8), we found that the activity
in these ROIs was parametrically modulated by the
econometrically reconstructed other-regarding utility.
Conclusions: Neural activity in regions usually associated
with decision value and reward processing correlate with
the econometrically reconstructed other-regarding utility.
Our preliminary results suggest that social distance is
systematically integrated into the decision making
process and social distance is represented as part of the
value function in reward-related brain regions.
D-05
DEVELOPMENT
OF
NEURAL
MECHANISMS
UNDERLYING SOCIAL COMPARISONS William E.
Moore III, University of Oregon; Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University
of Oregon - Social comparisons are an important means by
which we gain information about the self, but little is
known about the neural mechanisms underlying
comparative social judgment, as most prior neuroimaging
research on this topic has investigated judgments of self or
others in isolation in adult populations. No work to date
has explored the developmental trajectories associated
with comparative social judgment, but as adolescence is
associated with dramatic changes in both the importance
of social contexts and in self-related processing, it presents
an ideal epoch from which to investigate the self as it
emerges from a rich social milieu of interpersonal
interactions and evaluations. To address this gap in the
literature, we used fMRI to investigate the neural
correlates of social comparisons in early adolescents and
adults across judgment contexts that varied in degree of
personal involvement in the comparison and selfsimilarity of judgment targets. In adult populations,
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) has routinely
been implicated in social cognitive tasks that rely on such
absolute judgments about the self or others. Recent work
from our laboratory has demonstrated that the interaction
between personal involvement and self-similarity of

judgment targets determines neural activity during social
comparisons in vmPFC (specifically, perigenual anterior
cingulate cortex; pACC) as well as in the bilateral anterior
insula. In adults, comparisons between the self and similar
others exhibit a unique response in this region when
contrasted against other judgment contexts, suggesting
that the special psychological status afforded to these
social comparisons is indexed by activity in the pACC
region of vmPFC. Here, developmental analyses assess
differences in pACC response to comparisons between the
self and similar others for adolescents and adults. Results
from repeated measures analyses at the group level
additionally consider development, personal involvement,
and self-similarity of comparison targets as they interact to
modulate the brain’s response to social judgments.
D-06
CULTURAL
BACKGROUND
AND
RESTING
CARDIAC VAGAL CONTROL INDEPENDENTLY
INFLUENCE EMOTION RESPONSES Xiao-Fei Yang,
University of Southern California, *ICNC Travel Award
Winner; Mary Helen Immordino-Yang, University of Southern
California - Our emotion behavior is shaped both by
biological factors and social norms and expectations. For
example, members of the Chinese culture have been
described to value emotion moderation (Russell & Yik,
1996), and to experience emotions with “lower frequency,
intensity and duration” (Bond, 1993), comparing to
members of the Western culture. Higher resting cardiac
vagal control (rCVC), an index of the parasympathetic
nervous system functioning, has been considered a
positive biological factor for emotion regulation (Porges,
2007), and been linked with less negative emotional
expression (Pu, et al., 2010). However, most studies on
rCVC and emotion regulation were done with western
participants; and most studies of cultural differences in
emotion behavior did not take into consideration
variations in participants’ rCVC. Here we investigated
how cultural background and rCVC together influence
emotion responses, including expressive behavior and
heart rate response, as well as possible interactions
between cultural background and rCVC. 15 Chinese
participant (C) in Beijing, 16 second-generation EastAsian American (EA) and 16 non-Asian American (NA)
participants in Los Angeles were recruited. Three
participant groups were matched for age and gender.
Participants first viewed video-clips depicting another
person’s painful physical injury, designed to elicit
compassion for physical pain, and discussed their feelings
during a one-on-one, private interview session.
Independent coders watched recorded interview and
rated participants’ behavioral expressivity. During a later
ECG recording session, participants viewed 5-second
reminders of the video-clips followed by periods of 13second black-screen for reflection/deliberation (see
Immordino-Yang et al., 2009). Peak heart rate increases
were identified during the stimulus presentation phase
and the reflection/deliberation phase respectively.
Baseline ECG recordings were also taken to establish
measures for rCVC. We found that controlling for
cultural group, those with higher rCVC were less
expressive during the interview (F[1,39] = 6.01, p = 0.02).

And controlling for rCVC, three groups’ behavioral
expressivity differed (F[2,42] = 5.38, p = 0.01), with C
being least expressive and NA most expressive (linear
contrast, p = 0.004). No interaction between these two
factors was found. Cultural background modulated
participants’ peak heart rate increases during the
reflection/deliberation phase (F[2,39] = 2.65, p = 0.08), but
not the stimulus presentation phase. Further, in bicultural
EA participants, those who have higher rCVC also
showed stronger bias towards East-Asian culture (self
report measures; rho = 0.74, p = 0.003).
Our results
extended previous understanding of how cultural
background and rCVC influence emotion responding by
demonstrating that contributions from these two factors
are statistically independent (additive). We also
demonstrate an intriguing interplay between biological
propensity towards emotion regulation and adopted
cultural value in bi-cultural participants. Future
developmental studies are needed to investigate the
causal relationship of this effect.
D-07
NEURAL BASES OF MESSAGE PROPAGATION
Stephanie Vezich, UCLA; Ben Gunter, UCLA; Locke Welborn,
UCLA; Matthew Lieberman, UCLA - Mentalizing regions in
the brain (e.g., medial prefrontal cortex, precuneus)
reliably activate when individuals encode social
information, such as inferring another person’s mental
state. However, we hypothesize that people may recruit
these same regions while encoding non-social information
(e.g., the premise of an upcoming action film) because of
an underlying motivation to share this information with
individuals for whom it may be relevant (e.g., tell a friend
who likes action movies that she might like this film). In
the current study, 22 participants viewed trailers for 12
not-yet released films while in the MRI scanner.
Unbeknownst to them until after the scanner portion of
the study, they were later given the opportunity to share
information about each film. Sharing information was
associated with activity in mentalizing and reward
regions, suggesting support for our theory that
participants were spontaneously encoding information
about certain films as socially valuable.
D-08
DISSOCIATIONS
IN
REWARD
NETWORK
ACTIVATION
WHILE
LEARNING
FROM
COGNITIVE VERSUS AFFECTIVE FEEDBACK Jenna
M. Reinen, Columbia University; Catherine Insel, Columbia
University; Sergio Zenisek, Columbia University; Tor D.
Wager, University of Colorado, Boulder; Nathaniel D. Daw,
New York University; Daphna Shohamy, Columbia University
- Converging evidence indicates that the human reward
network supports incremental, trial-by-trial learning from
feedback.
Specifically,
functional
imaging
has
demonstrated that prediction errors are represented in the
striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), as
well as in the hippocampus, insula, and amygdala in
response to positive and negative outcomes. These
learning signals are thought to drive future choices that
maximize gain and minimize loss. Importantly, the ability

to learn to make the best choices over time involves both
associating cognitive feedback with a stimulus, as well as
experiencing an appropriate affective reaction to a reward
or loss. To date, most studies present feedback
information and reward outcome temporally collapsed
together, which does not allow one to identify the
separate contributions of different neural systems to
cognitive versus affective reactions to feedback. To
address this, we tested 24 subjects on a two-stage,
probabilistic, feedback-based learning task while
undergoing fMRI. Participants made choices during two
phases of non-intermixed conditions (gain, loss). On each
trial, subjects chose between two shapes and received
feedback (correct, incorrect) followed by reward outcome
(monetary gain or loss). To assess learning at each stage,
we calculated prediction error independently for feedback
and reward outcome. Results indicated that there was a
dissociation in activation in several structures associated
with the reward network. In particular, prediction error
was represented in the striatum during cognitive
feedback, and in the amygdala during reward
presentation. Further, vmPFC showed more activation
when subjects received rewards as opposed to rewardrelated feedback. These findings suggest that structures
within the reward network contribute differentially to
cognitive and affective aspects of feedback-based reward
learning.
D-09
KINEMATIC
FINGERPRINTS
OF
SOCIAL
INTERACTION: A TMS STUDY Lucia Maria Sacheli,
Sapienza University of Rome, IRCCS, *ICNC Travel Award
Winner; Matteo Candidi, Sapienza University of Rome,
IRCCS; Enea Francesco Pavone, Sapienza University of Rome,
IRCCS; Emmanuele Tidoni, Sapienza University of Rome,
IRCCS; Salvatore Maria Aglioti, Sapienza University of Rome,
IRCCS - The ability to jointly perform an action with
another individual necessarily requires a discrete and yet
integrated computation of both agents’ motor plans
possibly through simulative-like mechanisms. Here we
explored the role of simulation in joint-contexts by
analysing the kinematics of a face-to-face joint-grasping
task. In particular, we investigated whether the
recruitment of anticipatory motor simulation during the
interaction was modulated by participants’ individual
interactional role (Experiment 1). Moreover, we
investigated by means of Transcranial Magnetic
Stimulation (TMS, Experiment 2) the causal contribution
of fronto-parietal regions - crucial for the individual
reach-to-grasp planning - to the interpersonal
coordination process; in particular, we explored the role
of these regions in supporting participants’ ability to
predict the partner’s movements and to adapt their
individual action on the base of these predictions. In the
first experiment, we asked pairs of participants to
perform synchronous joint-grasps. The task was to
synchronously grasp a bottle-shaped object placed in
front of them via either a gross or a precise grasping and
to perform either imitative or complementary actions as a
couple. Participants could perform the task acting as: i)
Leader, i.e., knowing in advance the movement to be
performed; or ii) Follower, i.e., receiving the instruction to

adapt to the partner. Our results show that predictive
simulation differs from plain motor resonance and is
differently recruited according to the individual
interactional role. Indeed, i) when acting as Leader,
participants are impervious to the influence of the other’s
movements and try instead to make their kinematics more
“communicative” in order to enhance their own
movement predictability; in contrast ii) when acting in the
role of Follower, participants tend to imitate the Leader in
the complementary action condition, although this
involuntary mimicry is detrimental to the jointperformance. Thus, we hypothesize that the ability to
achieve good coordination is supported by the ability to
inhibit automatic imitation and to on-line integrate the
prediction of the partner’s goal with information about
his/her on-going movements. Within this framework, we
studied the possibility to interfere with these processes by
virtual inhibition of the anterior Intra Parietal Sulcus,
(aIPS); this was achieved by an off-line 20 s continuous
Theta Burst Stimulation applied before the kinematics
recording of individuals engaged in a motor interaction
with a virtual partner.
D-10
EMOTION, MOVEMENT, AND THE CENTRAL
NERVOUS SYSTEM: THINKING OUTSIDE THE
BRAIN Jennifer Kornelsen, University of Winnipeg; Theresa
A. McIver, University of Winnipeg; Stephen D. Smith,
University of Winnipeg - BACKGROUND: Emotional
stimuli receive prioritized attentional and motoric
processing in the brain, thus allowing for rapid
behavioural responses to salient, and potentially
threatening, elements of the environment. Indeed, recent
studies have identified a neural link between emotional
and motoric responses; numerous transcranial magnetic
stimulation studies have detected greater excitability of
the motor cortex and corticospinal tract during the
presence of emotional, as opposed to neutral, images and
sounds (e.g., Schutter et al., 2008). However, missing
from existing models of emotion-movement interactions
is the activity of neurons within the spinal cord. This
omission is surprising given that the spinal cord is the
neuroanatomical link between the brain regions involved
in planning the movements and the peripheral nervous
system that executes them. Recent advances in functional
MRI scanning sequences have enabled researchers to
consistently detect neural responses in spinal cord
neurons. Using these techniques, our research group
reported negative-emotion-dependent neural responses in
the cervical spinal cord (Smith & Kornelsen, 2011).
Subsequent studies have found that these responses are
limb-specific (McIver et al., 2012). Specifically, images of
emotional scenes involving the hands (e.g., defending
oneself) produced greater cervical spinal cord responses
than did neutral images or emotional images involving
the feet (which are innervated by the lumbar region of the
spinal cord). The current research attempts to complete
this model of the “emo-motoric system” by examining
whether foot-related emotional responses elicit greater
activity in lumbar spinal cord neurons than do neutral or
hand-related emotional responses. METHODS: Twelve
healthy undergraduate participants completed four 320-

second fMRI runs involving passive viewing of images.
Separate fMRI runs were conducted for each valence type
(negative or neutral) and targeted limb (hand or foot),
which resulted in four different conditions: HandNegative, Hand-Neutral, Foot-Negative, and FootNeutral.
Runs were presented in a pseudocounterbalanced order across participants and images
within a given run were randomized. Stimulus blocks of
53s duration were composed of 15 individual
photographs shown for 3533ms each; these blocks were
alternated with 40s presentations of a fixation cross. fMRI
images were acquired spanning the lumbar spinal cord
segments using a 3-Tesla Siemens scanner. RESULTS:
Consistent with our predictions, images depicting
negative emotional scenes involving foot movements
elicited the greatest amount of activity. The FootNegative condition (346 active voxels) produced
significantly more activity than the Foot-Neutral (221
voxels, p < 0.0025), Hand-Neutral (266 voxels, p < 0.033),
and Hand-Negative (258 voxels, p < 0.05) conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate (1) that emotional
perception in the brain leads to specific motoric inputs to
the rest of the nervous system and (2) that these inputs
can be detected and quantified at the level of the spinal
cord using fMRI. Emotional images involving the hands
elicit greater activity than other stimulus types in the
cervical spinal cord (McIver et al., 2012) and emotional
images involving the feet elicit greater activity than other
stimulus types in the lumbar/sacral spinal cord (current
study). Future studies will attempt simultaneous fMRI of
the brain and spinal cord to further specify the neural
substrates of this emo-motoric system.
D-11
NEUROBEHAVIORAL
EVIDENCE
FOR
“COMPASSION CARRYOVER” Alexander Genevsky,
Stanford University, *SANS Graduate Student Travel
Award Winner; Thupten Jinpa, McGill University; Brian
Knutson, Stanford University - Introduction: From a
Buddhist perspective, extending compassion involves
efforts to identify with the suffering of others, to wish
them be free of suffering, and (optionally) to feel a
compulsion to rid them of suffering.
From a
psychological perspective, while extending compassion
undoubtedly invokes negative affect, it also might elicit
positive affect towards the target. In this study we sought
to behaviorally examine whether extending compassion
can have a lasting positive affective impact on reactions to
the target, and to neurally explore whether evidence for
such a positive shift might be reflected by changes in
brain activity. Methods: While undergoing functional
magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) in a 3.0 Tesla GE
scanner, subjects (n=25) participated in two compassion
related tasks. First in an “extend compassion” task, they
viewed faces with sad or neutral expressions and were
instructed to either extend compassion or remain neutral
toward the target (6 sec), after which they rated how
effectively they followed each instruction. In a second
“compassion carry-over” task, subjects rated the affective
impact of pieces of abstract art which were subliminally
paired with the faces previously presented in the “extend
compassion” task. Results: Behaviorally, subjects rated

art that was subliminally paired with compassion
instruction faces as eliciting more positive affect than art
that was subliminally paired with neutral instruction
faces.
Target facial expression, however, had no
significant effect on ratings. Neurally, in the first “extend
compassion” task, extending compassion versus
neutrality was associated with significantly (p<.001,
uncorrected) increased activity in regions implicated in
value integration (medial prefrontal cortex, mPFC),
positive arousal (nucleus accumbens, NAcc), and theory
of mind (temporal parietal junction, TPJ). In the second
“compassion carryonver” task, abstract art which was
subliminally paired with faces to which compassion
versus neutrality had previously been extended elicited
significantly increased activity in the NAcc. Discussion:
The current findings suggest that beyond invoking
negative affect, extending compassion elicits positive
feelings towards the target, which may “carry over” into
other encounters, even below the level of awareness.
Thus, the findings suggest that even a simple exercise in
cultivating compassion can have significant and lasting
benefits towards interactions with others, even when they
are strangers. Acknowledgements: Stanford Center for
Cognitive and Neurobiological Imaging, Stanford Center
for Compassion and Altruism Research and Education.
D-12 *SANS Poster Award Winner
BRAIN ACTIVATION DURING JUNK FOOD
REAPPRAISAL MODERATES THE REAL WORLD
CRAVING-EATING
LINK
Jordan
Miller-Ziegler,
University of Oregon; Nicole R. Giuliani, University of
Oregon; Traci Mann, University of Minnesota; Janet
Tomiyama, UCLA; Elliot T. Berkman, University of Oregon Successful emotion regulation is integral to pursuing
long-term goals. However, while previous research has
examined the neural mechanisms of emotion regulation
extensively, and has linked emotion regulation to
everyday well-being broadly, little research thus far has
directly examined how the neural systems involved in
emotion regulation relate to goal-relevant outcomes in a
specific real-world context. The present research
combines neuroimaging and experience sampling
methods to explore the relation between neural indices of
emotion regulation and successful avoidance of
idiosyncratically craved energy-dense foods among
college students. In the study, 41 subjects completed a
craving reappraisal task during functional magnetic
resonance imaging. For two weeks following the scan,
they reported their craving for and consumption of a
personally-salient, craved food item four times each day
using experience sampling measured with SMS text
messaging. Hierarchical linear modeling analyses
revealed that, during the experience sampling phase,
craving for the target food at one time point predicted
how much of that food was eaten by the next time point,
and this relationship was attenuated by reappraisalrelated activation (vs. rest) in left inferior frontal gyrus
during the craving reappraisal task performed prior to
experience sampling. This finding supports the role of
inferior frontal gyrus in real-world, goal-relevant affect
regulation.

D-13
BOTH
EXPECTATION
AND
PSYCHOPATHY
MODERATE THE NEURAL RESPONSE TO FEARFUL
FACES: AN ERP STUDY OF SUCCESSFUL FEMALE
PSYCHOPATHS Katherine Pappas, Hampshire College;
Colin Quirk, Hampshire College; Jane Couperus, Hampshire
College - Viewing fearful, as opposed to neutral, faces has
been associated with many different event related
potential (ERP) responses, such as enhanced amplitude
for the: P1, N1, P2, N3, and P3 components. Fearful faces
orient attention and can be processed unconsciously, but
when a person expects to see a fearful face then the neural
response is smaller. Psychopathy research has intersected
with emotion-processing research, yielding widespread
results showing that people with high levels of
psychopathic traits have a deficit in processing the fear of
others. However, most of this research has been
conducted on an all-male inmate population, which does
not address issues such as potential gender differences or
whether there are neural abnormalities seen in a
population of successful (non-incarcerated) psychopaths.
This study is one of the first to investigate the effect of
cueing on the neural response to fear, as well as one of the
first to investigate the neural underpinnings of female
psychopathy. We used a group of twelve female college
students, with six showing high levels of psychopathic
traits (constituting the high traits group), and six who
showed low levels of psychopathic traits (the low traits
group). Psychopathy was measured using the
Psychopathic Personality Inventory. We used a gender
discrimination task, with the latent purpose of looking at
the neural correlates of viewing fearful and neutral faces
under validly cued and uncued conditions. In the cued
condition, the participant was shown a fearful picture (the
cue), followed by a fearful face (the target), and was asked
to discriminate the gender of the face; in the uncued
fearful condition there was no fearful picture preceding
the face, only a fixation cross. In the neutral condition the
cue picture was of neutral valence, and the target picture
was of a person making a neutral expression. The four
conditions occurring in the task were: uncued fearful,
cued fearful, uncued neutral, and cued neutral. ERP data
for the P2 and P3 components were analyzed using
repeated measures analysis of variance, and significant
effects were followed up with paired sample T-tests.
There was overall a significant group effect seen in both
P2 (F=7.263, p=.023) and P3 (F=5.365, p=.043) amplitude,
where the high traits group showed significantly
attenuated P2 and P3 amplitudes when compared to the
low traits group across the same trial conditions. There
was also a significant effect of cueing in both the P2
(F(1,10)=9.069, p=.013) and P3 (F(1,10)=6.983, p=.025)
component, where uncued fearful expressions elicited
augmented neural responses when compared to the cued
fearful expressions (t(11)=-4.809, p=.001 for the P2
component). These findings support theories of
psychopathy that involve aberrant neural processing of
fearful stimuli, and demonstrate that this is present even
in sample of female college students.

D-14
WHAT WAS I THINKING? CONTENT DIMENSIONS
AND TRAIT PREDICTORS OF SELF-GENERATED
THOUGHT Jessica Andrews-Hanna, University of Colorado
Boulder; Amy Turner, University of Colorado Boulder; Andrew
Reineberg, University of Colorado Boulder; Roselinde
Henderson, Yale University; Marie Banich, University of
Colorado Boulder - Though it is well established that our
minds often stray from the external environment, the
dimensions of content characterizing such “self-generated
thoughts” (SGTs) and the factors driving their individual
differences remain poorly understood. To seek insight
into these questions, we developed a novel thought
sampling paradigm in which 77 healthy young adults
generated numerous SGTs and rated each thought on
several content-specific variables. Exploratory principle
components and cluster analyses across these variables
revealed four distinct dimensions of content: 1) personal
significance, 2) episodic specificity, 3) social orientation,
and 4) valence. On average, participants reported SGTs
that were highly personally significant, moderately
specific, somewhat socially-oriented, and positive in
valence. Importantly, individual differences in content
dimensions were predicted by dimensional traits relevant
to mental health. In particular, individuals who scored
higher on depression/negative affect questionnaires rated
their thoughts as more negatively valenced (dimension 4)
and personally significant, or central to their sense of selfidentity (dimension 1). In contrast, individuals who
scored higher on mindfulness traits rated their thoughts
as more positive in valence (dimension 4). Additionally,
depression/negative affect and mindfulness were
strongly inversely correlated, suggesting that mindfulness
may be a protective factor against depression/negative
affect.
Interestingly, the relationship between trait
measures and valence was mediated by state affect,
suggesting that current mood may modify the
accessibility of negative vs. positive SGTs. In contrast to
valence, state affect did not affect the perceived personal
significance of such thoughts, suggesting that alterations
in one’s self-concept may represent a stable characteristic
of affective traits. Overall, these results highlight the
content of SGTs as an important factor underlying
dimensional traits relevant to mental health.
D-15
VASOPRESSIN MODULATES NEURAL ACTIVITY IN
THE RIGHT SUPERIOR TEMPORAL CORTEX
DURING HUMAN REACTIVE AGGRESSION Claudia
Brunnlieb, University Magdeburg, University Lübeck; Thomas
F. Münte, University Lübeck; Ulrike M. Krämer, University
Lübeck; Bodo Vogt, University Magdeburg; Claus
Tempelmann, University Magdeburg; Marcus Heldmann,
University Lübeck, University Magdeburg - Research on
animal models and investigations in humans point to a
key role of the neuropeptide arginine vasopressin (AVP)
in social forms of aggressive behavior, primarily in maleto-male aggression. For example, cerebrospinal fluid AVP
levels were positively correlated with life histories of
general aggression - an effect more pronounced for men
than for women. Nonetheless, to what extent AVP

modulates the neural underpinnings of human aggressive
behavior are not clear yet. By using fMRI and a modified
version of the Taylor aggression paradigm (TAP), the
current study delineated the impact of AVP on the neural
basis of the distinct stages of human reactive aggression.
We administered 20 IU AVP intranasally in a placebo
controlled double-blind manner to 31 healthy males (16
AVP/15 Placebo). Participants were told that they would
play a reaction time task (rtt) against another person who
in fact was a confederate of the experimenter. The TAP
comprised ‘passive’ and ‘active’ blocks. In ‘passive’ blocks
participants were punished by a loud aversive tone, when
they lost the rtt, but could not administer a punishment to
the opponent player when winning the rtt. In ‘active’
blocks the participant could punish the opponent player
on win trials, but did not get punished on loss trials. Each
trial comprised a decision phase (selection of punishment
level) and an outcome phase (feedback about the
opponents’ punishment level and whether won or lost the
trial). At the end of each trial the punishment was
administered depending on the actual block. On the
neural level, AVP enhanced the BOLD signal in the right
STS during the decision phase of ‘passive’ trials to a level
comparable to that observed for ‘active’ trials in both
groups. This finding might be interpreted in terms of an
AVP
effect
on
neural
processes
supporting
mentalizing/appraisal processes. During the decision
phase of ‘passive’ blocks the AVP group might have
reflected more on their punishment level selection and its
possible consequences on the opponents’ choice. In a
similar fashion like in Thompson et al. (2004), this finding
might also indicate that AVP increases the salience of less
meaningful social interactions (the decision phase of
‘passive’ trials in the present study). Unexpectedly, we
did not find any substantial impact of AVP on behavior.
According to the General Aggression Model of Anderson
and Bushman (Anderson and Bushman, 2002) numerous
variables impact aggressive behavior in humans with
each of these factors contributing only a small fraction of
the variance in order to prevent erratic aggressive
responses and to stabilize behavior. Thus, it might not be
surprising after all that AVP changed neural responses,
but did not lead (yet?) to changes in overt aggressive
behavior in humans.
D-16
THE FACE VALUE OF FEEDBACK: COMPARING
THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL AND NONSOCIAL
FEEDBACK ON NEURAL ACTIVITY AND ERROR
CORRECTION Christopher M. Crew, Columbia University;
Olta Hoxha, Baruch College; Geraldine Downey, Columbia
University; Jennifer Mangels, Baruch College - Evaluative
feedback is an effective means of influencing learning and
behavior. Yet, despite the fact that feedback is often
provided in interpersonal contexts, little research has
investigated the effects of social vs. nonsocial feedback
cues on learning and error correction. In addition,
although considerable research suggests that females are
better at interpreting facial expressions than males, it is
unknown whether this advantage influences the effects of
social compared to nonsocial performance feedback on
learning and memory. The current study was designed to

address these issues. First, we ask whether social and
nonsocial performance feedback elicit different neural
responses and/or behavioral consequences. Then, we
explore whether gender moderates these effects, and if so,
to what extent gender differences are related to individual
differences in sensitivity to interpersonal rejection. To
address these questions, we used an incidental-learning
paradigm where participants answered general
knowledge questions (What is the capital of Delaware?)
followed by immediate performance feedback (correct vs.
incorrect) and the correct answer (Dover). Initially
incorrect items were retested 24 to 48 hours later to
determine if the correct answer had been successfully
encoded. We used a counterbalanced blocked design
where accuracy feedback during the initial test phase was
either social (disapproving face saying “incorrect”;
approving face saying “correct”) or nonsocial (incorrect:
red asterisk paired with low tone; correct: green asterisk
paired with high tone). Although correction rate was
unaffected by feedback condition (e.g., social vs.
nonsocial) or rejection sensitivity (RS) overall, this result
was moderated by gender. Specifically, females corrected
more items than males in the social condition, but an
equal amount in the nonsocial condition. For females,
however, higher RS scores were associated with poorer
error correction in the social condition. RS did not
influence error correction in males. To better understand
the mechanisms underlying these behavioral effects we
measured the following ERP components during initial
accuracy feedback (correct or incorrect): the frontallymaximal feedback related negativity (FRN) and a
centrally-maximal late positive potential (LPP). These
components have been shown to reflect more automatic
processing of feedback valence, and more controlled,
sustained attention and arousal to the feedback,
respectively. Overall, social feedback was associated with
an earlier and larger FRN, as well as an enhanced LPP.
With respect to gender, females showed a larger FRN to
corrective feedback in the social condition, but there were
no gender effects for the LPP. RS did not appear to
predict the amplitude of the FRN or the LPP for either
gender. We also measured the relationship between these
ERPs and successful error correction. Although the FRN
was not associated with learning, the LPP negatively
predicted learning success for social feedback and
positively predicted learning success for non-social
feedback. Neither gender nor RS moderated these effects.
Taken together, these results suggest that heightened
attention and arousal to social feedback is not always
adaptive for learning. Furthermore, although RS may not
moderate neural responses to negative social feedback it
appears that, for females, high sensitivity to interpersonal
rejection impairs retrieval success during negative social
feedback.
D-17
RESPONSES OF DORSAL MEDIOFRONTAL AND
RIGHT VENTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
TO INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT FOR RESOURCES
Leonie Koban, University of Colorado Boulder, University of
Geneva; Swann Pichon, University of Geneva; Patrik
Vuilleumier, University of Geneva - Little is known about

brain mechanisms recruited during the monitoring and
appraisal of interpersonal conflicts - for instance when
individuals compete with each other for the same
resources. Recent research points to an important role of
the dorsal mediofrontal cortex (dMFC) not only in
cognitive, but also in affective and social conflict and error
monitoring. We designed a novel experimental task
inducing resource conflicts between two individuals. In
an event-related fMRI design, participants (n=22) played
with another human participant or against a computer,
who across trials chose either different (no conflict) or the
same tokens (conflict trials) in order to obtain monetary
gains. In conflict trials, the participants could decide
whether they would share the token, and the resulting
gain, with the other person or instead keep all points for
themselves. Our behavioral results showed that
participants shared much more often when playing with a
human partner than with a computer. FMRI results
demonstrated that the dMFC was selectively activated
during human conflicts, but not in the computer control
condition. This region might play a key role in detecting
situations in which self- and social interest are
incompatible and require behavioral adjustment, in line
with a more general “social conflict monitoring”
mechanism. In addition, we found a conflict-related
response in the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
(vlPFC) that correlated with measures of social
relationship and individual sharing behavior, indicating
that the vlPFC may be important for the regulation of
emotions and behavior in social interactions. Taken
together, these findings reveal a key role of these
prefrontal areas for the appraisal and resolution of
interpersonal resource conflicts.
D-18
INDEPENDENT VERSUS INTERDEPENDENT SELFCONSTRUAL PRIMING ELICITS DIFFERENCES IN
THE SPONTANEOUS REGULATION OF POSITIVE
EMOTIONS IN CHINESE PARTICIPANTS Kate Anne
Woodcock, University of Birmingham; Yi Liu, Peking
University; Shihui Han, Peking University - When compared
to those from independent cultures (like the US), people
from more interdependent cultures (like China) tend to
report less experience and expression of positive emotions
and greater emotion differentiation across social contexts.
We used self-construal priming in Chinese participants to
investigate the effect of activating more independent
versus interdependent thinking on spontaneous emotion
regulation in specific contexts. 32 Chinese students (16
males) observed positive photographs in two sessions
following independent or interdependent priming.
Imagined ingroup versus outgroup social context was
manipulated in separate blocks. Participants reported
more suppression of positive emotion (questionnaire) and
less self-reported arousal (post picture ratings) following
interdependent priming. However, the decrease in
arousal was greater in the ingroup context. Gender
differences emerged in a performance based measure of
cognitively effortful regulation. 20 Chinese male students
observed positive photographs during fMRI acquisition.
In order to localize brain areas involved in emotion
regulation, participants were instructed not to regulate, or

to up- or down-regulate their emotions on separate trials.
To investigate the effect of self-construal priming on
spontaneous emotion regulation, experimental trials were
administered in two blocks following independent or
interdependent priming. Participants either observed
photographs with no specific instructions or regulated
their positive emotion as they would in an ingroup
context. Using areas of neural activation associated with
up- or down-regulation in the localization scans as
regions of interest, we compared spontaneous and
ingroup-context linked regulation following independent
versus interdependent priming. Results revealed effects of
self-construal priming on spontaneous regulation of
positive emotions.
D-19
POWER ENHANCES THE NEURAL PROCESSING OF
OUTGROUP FACES: EVIDENCE FROM THE N170
COMPONENT OF THE ERP Petra Schmid, David Amodio;
New York University - Previous research has shown that
powerful people stereotype minority group members
more than powerless people. Our aim was to better
understand how power influences the perception of racial
minority members by investigating its effect on the initial
neural processing of White and Black American faces.
Additionally, we want to test whether power affects
intergroup face processing differently depending on the
context; that is, whether faces are viewed in the context of
evaluations or trait associations. In an evaluative context,
threat associated with Blacks faces would be emphasized,
leading high-power people to be more vigilant to the
potential threat and thus show stronger effects of early
face processing. By contrast, when making trait
judgments that are not evaluative in nature, the potential
threat of the outgroup to the high-power status is less
salient. Therefore, we expect high-power people to show
increased neural activity in regions specialized for face
processing in the context of making evaluative judgments
but not when making non-evaluative trait judgments.
Forty White participants were induced to feel either high
or low in power and then completed two sequential
priming tasks. In the tasks, prime stimuli included White
and Black males faces, followed by words categorized
according to either their valence (pleasant vs. unpleasant)
or traits that did not differ in valence (intelligence vs.
athleticism). EEG was recorded during task performance,
and face encoding processes were index by the N170 ERP
component. Consistent with our hypothesis, a three-way
interaction pattern emerged: Power priming affected
N170 responses to Black faces, but not White faces, and
only during the evaluative context. No such difference
was found in the trait judgment context. These results
suggest that power can alter the way faces of minority
outgroup members are perceived, but only in contexts
that emphasize threat and potential intergroup conflict.
D-20
CONDITIONED INHIBITION AND THE LEARNING
OF NEGATIVE VALUES Randy O'Reilly, Tor Wager,
Guido Frank; University of Colorado Boulder - To look at
what happens in the brain when rewards are worse than

expected, we ran a condition inhibition study which
involved pairing a CS with two different stimuli, orange
juice and a neutral solution. After the conditioning
procedure, we began conditioned inhibition, which
involves pairing the previously rewarded CS with an
inhibitor that “cancels” the expected reward. We also
included several other neutral controls for comparison
purposes, including a single stimulus and a pair of two
neutral stimuli.
With 17 subjects, we ran several
contrasts looking at the effect of reward omission on
learning.
Overall, the results show that there are
significant effects of this procedure in several parts of the
prefrontal cortex and brainstem. In particular, we
observed effects for the pairing of the conditioned
stimulus with the conditioned inhibitor after the training
period in the dorsomedial thalamus. Additional results
show an activation for the CS-Inhibitor in the lateral PFC,
as well as a slightly anterior deactivation. There was also
an activation in the VTA and amygdala for the AXstimulus. The activation for the CS-Inhibitor was
strongest in the vmPFC after learning.
Perhaps this
vmPFC activation reflects high-order abstraction of the
pairing of negative and positive valence. For the BY
stimulus there was a deactivation in medial PFC and
OFC, indicating that this stimulus is less rewarding that
the other stimuli. Looking at the non-rewarded stimulus,
we see deactivations in the basal ganglia and thalamus.
For the control stimulus (artificial saliva), there is a
deactivation in the VTA and amygdala. For the control
rewards, we see deactivation in the VTA, amygdala and
hippocampus. For the conditioned inhibitor rewarded in
the last block, we see a deactivation in the pgACC, which
fits with the ideas that this region is involved in negative
valence. Similarly, when the control stimulus was
rewarded, we also see deactivations in vmPFC, and OFC.
A contrast between the CS in conditioning and after
learning shows an activation in the hippocampus. There
was also interesting activity in the sgACC for the inhibitor
during learning, which is consistent with previous studies
showing its role in negative valence learning. In addition,
looking at the inhibitor contrasted with control showed an
activation in the medial dorsal thalamus. In addition,
learning about the negative valence CS caused activations
in the OFC and hippocampus. In a parametric model
looking at rewards that were better and worse than
expected, while controlling for all CS types, there was
activity in the vmPFC for the positive valence CS. For the
positive US that was expected to be rewarded but ended
up not getting rewarded, there was an activation in the
sgACC. For the rewarded negative valence CS, there was
an activation in the lateral PFC. For a contrast of the CSInhibitor during the learning period with after the
learning period, there is activity in the sgACC.
D-21
PSYCHOPATHIC
TRAITS
AND
THE
REPRESENTATION OF OTHERS’ EMOTIONAL
STATES Gustav Nilsonne, Sandra Tamm, Karolina Sörman,
Armita Golkar, Katarina Gospic, Marianne Kristiansson,
Andreas Olsson, Martin Ingvar, Predrag Petrovic; Karolinska
Institutet - Evolutionary game theory predicts that
prosocial traits will be non-uniformly distributed in the

human population. Individuals with very low prosocial
traits may receive a medical diagnosis of psychopathy or
antisocial personality disorder. One neurophysiological
mechanism generating prosocial motivation is the
empathic representation of others’ emotional states in
brain networks overlapping those brain networks that
represent own emotional states.
We validated the
Psychopathy Personality Inventory-Revised (PPI-R) in
Swedish, thus enabling us to measure phychopathic
personality traits. We found that PPI-R total scores were
approximately normally distributed in our sample,
indicating that psychopathic traits are dimensional and
not taxonic. The translated instrument showed good
convergent validity and retest reliability.
We then
investigated the effects of psychopathic personality on
emotional contagion and empathy. Emotional contagion
was measured by electromyography of facial muscles as
participants viewed film clips showing different facial
expressions.
Psychopathic coldheartedness predicted
lower muscle responses to happy faces but did not predict
muscle responses to angry faces. Empathy was measured
by self-rated unpleasantness and skin conductance
responses as the subject observed another person in pain.
Psychopathic coldheartedness predicted lower self-rated
and skin conductance responses to the other’s pain. These
results suggest that observed lower levels of prosocial
behaviour in psychopaths may be due to a weaker
representation of the other’s emotional state.
D-22
DISC1 GENE POLYMORPHISMS WITH RESPECT TO
COGNITIVE FUNCTIONING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA
Dorota Frydecka, Wroclaw Medical University; Lidia Karabon,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Wroclaw Medical University;
Edyta Pawlak-Adamska, Polish Academy of Sciences; Anna
Jele, Wroclaw Medical University; Błażej Misiak, Wroclaw
Medical University; Andrzej Kiejna, Wroclaw Medical
University - Background: DISC1 has been shown to
participate in the regulation of cell proliferation,
differentiation, migration, neuronal axon and dendrite
outgrowth and cell-to-cell adhesion. Several studies have
shown that unregulated expression or altered protein
structure of DISC1 may predispose individuals to the
development of schizophrenia and other psychiatric
conditions. DISC1 has been also implied to play role in
cognitive impairments, which are considered to be
endophenotypes of schizophrenia, i.e. subclinical,
heritable and independent of clinical state traits
associated with genetic susceptibility. Surprisingly, a
recent meta-analysis (Dickinson, 2007) demonstrated that
reliable and easy to administer Digit Symbol Coding Task
(DSCT) discriminate people with schizophrenia from
comparison individuals better than the more widely
studied neuropsychological instruments. Purpose: The
study was carried out to investigate the association of
SNP polymorphisms of DISC1 gene (rs1538979,
rs1122330) and schizophrenia with respect to performance
on DSCT. Material and methods: We included 103
patients diagnosed with schizophrenia according to ICD10 criteria and 578 controls in our study. The patients
were evaluated for lifetime psychotic symptomatology
using the Operational Criteria for Psychotic Illness

(OPCRIT) checklist.
DSCT was administered to 80
patients. Results: The polymorphisms were in HWE both
in the cases’ and controls’ groups. In single marker
analysis, we did not find any associations for the SNPs
tested. However; we have found that with respect to
rs1538979 polymorphism patients with TC genotype
performed worse than with CC genotype (p<0.05) and
with respect to rs1122330 polymorphism patients with
AG genotype performed worse than with GG genotype
(p<0,05) suggesting weaker cognitive processing
efficiency. Conclusion: Our data do not support the role
of DISC1 gene polymorphisms in the predisposition to
schizophrenia; however, DISC1 gene polymorphisms
might be considered as a risk factor for cognitive
impairment in schizophrenia.
D-23
SEPARABLE FMRI CORRELATES OF EXPERIENCE
AND BELIEF IN PLACEBO ANALGESIA Scott Schafer,
Tor Wager; University of Colorado Boulder - Previous
experience with a treatment and belief that the treatment
works are two behaviorally separable mechanisms that
underlie conditioned pain relief to a placebo. In this
study, healthy subjects received painful stimulation in the
context of two pharmacologically inert creams: a ‘control’
cream and a ‘treatment’ (placebo) cream. Subjects were
instructed that the treatment cream possessed strong
analgesic properties and would reduce their experienced
pain. During the conditioning process, subjects received
higher temperature stimulations with the control cream
compared to the placebo cream. After conditioning
subjects received identical thermal stimulations with both
control and placebo creams. Placebo analgesia is
measured as the reduction in pain rating with the placebo
cream compared to the control cream. To separate the
effects of experience and belief on placebo analgesia, we
manipulate experience between subjects and belief within
subjects.
We randomly assign subjects to high (4
conditioning sessions) and low (1 conditioning session)
experience groups. Following initial testing of placebo
analgesia using identical temperatures, we reduced belief
in the treatment by revealing that it was a placebo.
Prior to the reveal, all subjects reported experiencing less
pain on average with the treatment cream (p < .001).
Following the reveal we find that analgesia persists only
in the extensive experience group (p = .04), despite the
reported belief in the effectiveness of the treatment being
identical across groups. This implies that extensive
experience with a treatment can lead to placebo analgesia
that is not extinguished by instruction alone. We suspect
that this effect may be caused by an involuntary opiod
response conditioned from the repeated exposures to the
treatment. Given these findings, we hypothesized that
different brain regions would be related to different
behavioral aspects of placebo analgesia. To test this
hypothesis, half of the subjects were scanned using fMRI
during the testing procedure.
Placebo analgesia is
generally marked by a reduction in activation in the
bilateral anterior insula (aIns), dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex (dACC), and the medial thalamus. Prior to the
reveal, deactivation in bilateral aIns and dACC was
correlated with the strength of placebo analgesia (p <

.001), consistent with previous findings. High experience
subjects in particular show reduced activation in the
periaqueductal gray (PAG) during thermal stimulation
with the placebo compared to the control cream (p< .001).
The PAG is a central region for the release of opiods and
the experience of pain relief and reduction in activation
here is consistent with our hypothesis that the experience
manipulation increased opiod release in high experience
subjects.
Following the reveal, we find decreased
activation in the medial thalamus associated with the
strength of placebo analgesia for the high experience
group only (p < .001). This suggests that the medial
thalamus may be more important for placebo analgesia
that results from experience, while the bilateral aIns and
dACC may be more important for placebo analgesia
resulting from belief. In total, these findings suggest
separable roles for neural pain systems relating to
experience and belief in placebo analgesia and related
affective learning processes.
D-24
SOCIAL
WORKING
MEMORY:
NEURAL
MECHANISMS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIAL
COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH Meghan L
Meyer, Matthew D Lieberman; UCLA - Whether keeping
track of friends' perspectives in a conversation, a roomful
of colleagues' beliefs during a conference, or the political
ideology of someone we just met, we constantly juggle
social cognitive information. However, the neural
mechanisms supporting our ability to maintain and
manipulate social cognitive information, or social
working memory (SWM), remain elusive. On the one
hand, the neurocognitive network associated with social
cognition (‘mentalizing system’) engages in simple social
cognition tasks and may therefore support SWM. On the
other hand, this network reliably reduces activation
during traditional (i.e. non-social cognitive) working
memory tasks, and tends to be functionally antagonistic
with the lateral executive control network known to
support working memory. To examine how these
networks may support SWM, we conducted a series of
studies employing a SWM paradigm in which during
fMRI scanning participants encode 2, 3, or 4 of their
friends’ names, rank their friends along a trait dimension
during a delay period, and finally, answer a true/false
probe question about their rank order. Across studies,
results from parametric analyses show regions of the
mentalizing and executive control networks linearly
increase in activation as a function of the number of
friends considered during delay and retrieval. These
findings suggest previous generalizations of the
mentalizing and executive control networks as
antagonistic oversimplify their relationship. Instead, the
mentalizing and executive control network may work
together, rather than in opposition, to support effortful
thinking about the social world. Implications for social
cognitive theory and disorders of social cognition will be
discussed.

D-25
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CONVENTIONAL AND
CARE-BASED MORAL DECISION-MAKING Kelly K.
Leong, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of
Mental Health, Tufts University School of Dental Medicine;
Stuart F. White, National Institutes of Health, National
Institute of Mental Health; James R. Blair, National Institutes
of Health, National Institute of Mental Health - OBJECTIVES:
Recent cognitive neuroscience models of moral decisionmaking have stressed the importance of emotion, in
addition to traditional, purely cognitive accounts.
Evidence suggested that care-based moral decisionmaking is underpinned by an association with the distress
of others and negative emotional states and is observed in
regions such as the amygdala, vmPFC and insula. Neural
regions associated with conventional moral decisionmaking are lesser known. The current study sought to
compare care-based and conventional moral decisionmaking. METHODS: Participants were 17 healthy adults
(9 female) aged 21-40 years (Mean=26.46, SD=5.5) who
rated the wrongness of vignettes depicting socialconventional moral transgressions (e.g. a student having a
conversation during class) or care-based moral
transgressions (e.g. kicking a boy) while undergoing
functional MRI.
RESULTS:
A contrast between
activation during ratings of care-based moral
transgressions and ratings of conventional moral
transgressions found significantly greater activation in
several regions of insula during care-based moral
decision-making.
However, during ratings of
conventional moral transgressions increased activation in
bilateral temporal pole, temporal parietal junction,
precuneus and dorsal medial prefrontal cortex was
observed. CONCLUSIONS: Care-based moral decisionmaking was associated with increased activity in insula, a
region associated with negative affect. Conventional
moral decision-making was associated with greater
activation in a network of regions implicated in the
representation of other individual’s intentions (Theory of
Mind). This is consistent with the contextual nature of
conventional moral decision-making. The data provide
further support for the idea that care-based morality is
underpinned by emotional processes and is context
independent while conventional moral decision-making
requires understanding the greater social context and is
highly context dependent. This work was supported by
the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute
of Mental Health and the National Institutes of Health
Medical Research Scholars Program.
D-26
LEADERSHIP IS ASSOCIATED WITH LOWER
LEVELS OF STRESS Jennifer Lerner, Harvard University;
Gary D. Sherman, Harvard University; Jooa J. Lee, Harvard
University; Amy J. C. Cuddy, Harvard University; Jonathan
Renshon, Harvard University; Christopher Oveis, University
of California, San Diego; James J. Gross, Stanford University As leaders ascend to more powerful positions in their
groups, they face ever-increasing demands. As a result,
there is a common perception that leaders have higher
stress levels than nonleaders. However, if leaders also

experience a heightened sense of control‚ a psychological
factor known to have powerful stress-buffering effects‚
leadership should be associated with reduced stress
levels. Using unique samples of real leaders, including
military officers and government officials, we found that,
compared with nonleaders, leaders had lower levels of
the stress hormone cortisol and lower reports of anxiety
(study 1). In study 2, leaders holding more powerful
positions exhibited lower cortisol levels and less anxiety
than leaders holding less powerful positions, a
relationship explained significantly by their greater sense
of control. Altogether, these findings reveal a clear
relationship between leadership and stress, with
leadership level being inversely related to stress.
D-27
VENTRAL STRIATUM RESPONDS MORE TO
ATTRACTIVE
SAME-RACE
MEMBERS
THAN
ATTRACTIVE OTHER-RACE MEMBERS Robert S.
Chavez, Todd F. Heatherton; Dartmouth College - It has long
been established that people favor others who share
characteristics similar to their own. This is reflected in
certain mate preferences where there has traditionally
been high degree of assortative mating among individuals
of the same race. However, more recent evidence
suggests that mixed-race individuals are a perceived as
more attractive than non-mixed-race individuals (Rhodes
et al., 2005) and that more having more diverse genetic
information may confer certain health benefits (Roberts et
al., 2004). This discrepancy leaves open the question as to
whether or not people perceive attractive same-race
members differently than attractive other-race members.
To test this, we presented Caucasian male participants
with a set of photographs of peer-aged females in an
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) paradigm. The females in the photographs were
Black, East Asian, or Caucasian, and were categorized as
either high or low on attractiveness based on within-race
norms from an independent pilot study. Our results
indicate that compared to other-race pictures high in
attractiveness, same-race pictures high in attractiveness
elicited significantly greater activity in the bilateral
ventral striatum, including the nucleus accumbens and
ventral putamen. Previous research has shown that the
ventral striatum responds more to attractive faces than
unattractive faces, perhaps reflecting greater reward
related processing of those stimuli (Cloutier et al., 2008).
Consistent with the literature on in-group bias, the
current study provides preliminary evidence that
individuals show preferential reward related neural
activity to attractive same-race members than to attractive
other-race members.
D-28
EFFECT OF SELF-CONTROL TRAINING ON NEURAL
OVERLAP OF RESPONSE INHIBITION AND AFFECT
REGULATION Kathryn S. Gilliam, Rebecca D. Calcott,
Junaid S. Merchant, Lauren E. Kahn, Elliot T. Berkman;
University of Oregon - Both behavioral and neural evidence
support a domain-general model of self-control in which
various forms of self-control rely upon a shared neural

substrate. The aim of the current work is to investigate the
extent to which two different self-control tasks - response
inhibition and affect regulation - recruit similar neural
regions and to determine the extent to which training in
one self-control domain (response inhibition) leads to
behavioral or neural improvements in the untrained selfcontrol domain (affect regulation). To answer these
questions, we conducted a functional neuroimaging study
on eighty healthy college-aged participants. These
participants were randomly assigned to one of three
groups - a response inhibition training group, a sham
training group, or a passive control group. All groups
completed pre and post-training fMRI scans during which
they performed the Stop Signal Task (SST) and an affect
regulation task involving both cognitive reappraisal and
affect labeling. The SST required the participants to
establish a prepotent “go” response and then to
selectively inhibit this response after hearing an auditory
“stop” cue. The affect regulation task directed
participants either to decrease their emotional response to
distressing images using either cognitive reappraisal or
affect labeling or to simply observe the images. During
the three-week period between scans, the training group
returned to the lab to complete ten 7-minute training
sessions on the SST. The sham-training group also
returned to the lab ten times and completed the SST but
without the auditory stop cue, preventing training on the
task. The passive control group only completed the pre
and post scans. Results reveal that both self-control tasks
recruit overlapping frontal regions, including the inferior
frontal gyrus (IFG), at baseline. Preliminary analyses also
suggest that the degree of this neural overlap varies
across experimental groups following the training period.
Results will be discussed in the context of domain-general
self-control and the feasibility of improving it with
training.
D-29
POLITICAL
IDEOLOGY
AND
THE
REPRESENTATION
OF
BLACKNESS:
CONSERVATIVES (VS. LIBERALS) HAVE DISTINCT
NEURAL RESPONSES TO OBJECTIVE VISUAL
FEATURES OF RACE Amy R. Krosch, John. T. Jost, Jay J.
Van Bavel; New York University - From the earliest days of
American slavery through the Civil Rights Era, political
discourse has focused on the definition of race. Despite
having flexible boundaries and graded content, race has
often been treated as categorical, leading to
discriminatory policies like the “one-drop” rule. The
current research investigates the motivational influence of
political ideology on the representation of race in the
brain. In earlier behavioral research, we found that
conservative (vs. liberal) participants were more likely to
categorize mixed Black and White faces as Black. The
present neuroimaging study was designed to assess
whether ideological differences in race categorization are
merely driven by differences in the subjective
categorization of mixed-race faces or more basic
differences in the representation of objective visual
features (i.e., “Blackness”). Forty-five White participants
completed
a
race
categorization
task
during
neuroimaging as well as a self-report questionnaire

assessing political ideology (i.e., liberalism-conservatism).
In the race categorization task, participants saw a series of
faces, ranging from 100% White to 100% Black - at 10%
increments of racial ambiguity, and indicated whether the
face was Black or White. Group-level analyses (with
political ideology scores entered as a covariate) revealed
that as the objective racial content of faces increased
monotonically from White to Black, BOLD responses in
the insula and amygdala increased. These results extend
previous findings that Black vs. White faces elicit greater
insula and amygdala activation by suggesting that these
regions track the objective visual features (i.e.,
“Blackness”), rather than discrete racial categories.
Participants’ subjective categorization of faces as Black or
White was related to activity in areas of the visual cortex,
such that faces categorized as Black elicited greater
activity than faces categorized as White. Finally, we found
that individual differences in participants’ political
ideology moderated the relationships between objective
face “Blackness” and insula and amygdala activity.
Specifically, greater conservatism (vs. liberalism) was
related to a greater insula and amygdala activity as faces
increased in “Blackness”. However, political ideology did
not moderate the relationship between subjective race
categorization and visual cortex activity. These findings
suggest that there are distinct neural bases of graded race
perception vs. categorical race judgments and that
ideological differences in the neural representation of
objective visual features (i.e., “Blackness”) may lead to
biased racial categorization.
D-30
EMPATHIC
DEFICITS
IN
AUTISM
ARE
ASSOCIATED
WITH
ALTERED
INTRINSIC
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY
OF
THE
AMYGDALA Christine L. Cox, Phyllis Green and Randolph
Cowen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, NYU Langone
Medical Center; F. Xavier Castellanos, Phyllis Green and
Randolph Cowen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, NYU
Langone Medical Center, Nathan Klein Institute for Psychiatric
Research; Michael P. Milham, Child Mind Institute, Nathan
Klein Institute for Psychiatric Research; Clare Kelly, Phyllis
Green and Randolph Cowen Institute for Pediatric
Neuroscience, NYU Langone Medical Center; Adriana Di
Martino, Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen Institute for
Pediatric Neuroscience at the New York University Child
Study Center, NYU Langone Medical Center - Deficits in
empathy have been observed across various psychiatric
disorders. Previous work in our lab suggests that Relative
Empathic Ability (REA; Cox et al., 2012, SCAN), or an
individual’s tendency to be more affectively or
cognitively empathic, is a sensitive measure of the
interplay between multiple dimensions of empathy, and
is reflected in the intrinsic functional dynamics of socialemotional brain networks. Extending this work, we
examined the relationship between REA and the intrinsic
functional connectivity (iFC) of the amygdala in a sample
of adults diagnosed with an Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD) and an independent sample of neurotypical adults.
We collected resting-state fMRI scans (3T, EPI,
TR=2000ms, 180 volumes) from 31 ASD adults (mean age
32.1 [SD 11.6], 8 female; 1 PDD, 15 Asperger’s, 15 Autism)

and 51 neurotypical adults (mean age 31.2 [SD 9.9], 8
female). Groups did not differ in age, gender, or inscanner motion, but all were entered as covariates in
group iFC analyses. All participants also completed the
Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI), a standard self-report
measure of empathy, which was used to calculate
individual REA scores. After standard preprocessing and
nuisance signal regression, the residual timeseries from
the left amygdala seed (Cox et al., 2012) was extracted for
each individual and correlated with every other voxel in
the brain. REA scores were entered as covariates of
interest, and the resultant iFC maps were compared
between ASD and control groups (Z>2.3, p<0.05,
corrected), identifying brain regions in which the
relationship between amygdala iFC and REA varied as a
function of diagnosis.
ASD participants scored
significantly lower than controls on cognitive (t(81)=4.38 ,
p<0.001) and affective (t(81)=2.68 , p<0.01) empathy
scales, but there was only a marginal group difference for
REA scores (t(81)=1.77, p=0.08). We observed group
differences in the relationship between iFC of the
amygdala and REA in two brain regions. 1) Controls
exhibited stronger iFC between the amygdala and
superior temporal gyrus (STG) with greater cognitive
relative to affective empathic ability, while the ASD group
exhibited the opposite relationship - stronger iFC with
greater affective empathy. 2) ASD participants exhibited
stronger iFC between the amygdala and medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC) with greater cognitive relative to affective
empathic ability, while controls exhibited a less
pronounced, but opposite relationship - stronger iFC with
greater affective empathy, consistent with results from
our previous study (Cox et al., 2012). These findings
suggest that empathic deficits often observed in ASD are
related to altered intrinsic functional dynamics of socialemotional brain networks. Specifically, functional
connectivity between the amygdala, STG, and mPFC
appears to be differentially sensitive to cognitive and
affective empathic ability in ASD relative to neurotypical
adults.
D-31
EXTERNALIZING AND ERROR MONITORING IN
BOYS: THE EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL STRESS Mora
A. Reinka, Rose E. Jeffries, Brandon A. Bray, Alexander J.
Giovanetti, Cameron S. Laue, Kristina Hiatt Racer; University
of Oregon - The error-related negativity (ERN) is a
response-locked event-related potential (ERP) that
coincides with an incorrect response, and is indicative of
error-awareness and monitoring (e.g. Legault & Inzlicht,
2012). The ERN appears at medio-frontal sites, and
typically peaks between 80 and 150 milliseconds after the
erroneous response (e.g. Luu, Flaisch, & Tucker, 2000).
The relationship between the ERN and internalizing
symptoms, specifically anxiety, has been well established,
with more anxious individuals exhibiting larger ERNs
(e.g. Aarts & Pourtois, 2010). However, the relationship
between the ERN and externalizing symptoms hasn’t
been adequately explored. One previous study used a
clinical sample of boys and found that boys with
externalizing disorders had smaller ERN amplitudes than
boys with internalizing disorders (Stieben et al. 2007).

Here, we extend this work to a community sample of
boys with a range of externalizing symptoms. We were
particularly interested in the relationship between
externalizing and performance monitoring during stress.
Participants (n=27 boys ages 9-13 years) completed an
emotional go/no-go task (Stieben et al 2007). The task
consisted of three blocks, the first and third of which were
identical and had a lower degree of difficulty than the
second block. The second block was designed to be
emotionally frustrating; the participant lost all the points
he had accumulated in the first block regardless of
performance. The third block was structured in such a
way that the participant gained back a significant number
of his points. We examined relationships between parentreported externalizing symptoms and ERN amplitude for
incorrect trials. At baseline (Block 1) there was no
relationship between externalizing and ERN amplitude (r
= -.02, n.s.). However, externalizing was associated with a
larger ERN both during (Block 2; r = -.51, p = .008) and
after (Block 3; r = -.45, p = .02) the emotion manipulation.
These results held after controlling for internalizing
behaviors. These findings indicate that externalizing
behaviors are related to error responsiveness under
emotional duress. Furthermore, the lack of recovery in the
third block suggests a prolonged reactivity to emotional
frustration. The inconsistencies between our results and
those of the few other studies that have examined ERNs
in externalizing populations call for greater scrutiny of the
nature of the relationship between these two variables. In
particular, they suggest that the ERN during and after
emotional challenges can illuminate new aspects of the
relationship between externalizing and self-regulation.
D-32
THE NEURAL BASIS OF CULTURAL DIFFERENCES
IN THE PROCESSING OF EMOTION: A BRAINMAP
META-ANALYSIS Jessica Busler, *ICNC Travel Award
Winner, Alejandro Lazarte, Jennifer L. Robinson; Auburn
University - Over the last decade, a surge of research has
been aimed toward understanding differences in
emotional processing that result because of cultural
alignment.
Evidence from studies relating to the
cognitive model of emotions has shown that cultural
differences can account for variation in emotional
processing in each of the seven components of the model
(antecedent events, event coding, appraisal, physiological
reaction patterns, action readiness, emotional behavior,
and regulation). This contradicts the idea that emotions
are universal in nature.
Furthermore, differences
attributed to culture have emerged in the realm of
attention to positive and negative emotional stimuli.
From a neurophysiological perspective, differences in
amygdala activation for recognition of emotional faces
with contrasting contexts and fear processing have also
demonstrated cultural specificity. Taken together, the
data suggest that there may be unique neural
contributions during emotional processing dependent on
native culture.
To elucidate these differences, we
conducted three meta-analyses of the BrainMap database
within the ‘Emotion’ behavioral domain. Search criteria
were further refined to include only Native English
speakers (Meta-analysis 1), only Native German speakers

(Meta-analysis 2), and finally, only Native Chinese
speakers (Meta-analysis 3). A total of 53 papers were
included in our study. For the meta-analysis on native
English-speakers, 34 papers were identified (753 subjects,
205 experiments, 144 conditions, and 1395 locations),
while the native German speaker search criteria yielded
14 papers (260 subjects, 43 experiments, 60 conditions,
and 337 locations). Finally, the meta-analysis on native
Chinese speakers had the smallest number of papers
meeting search criteria with a total of 5 papers (74
subjects, 15 experiments, 14 conditions, and 138
locations). Activation likelihood estimation (ALE) was
performed on the resultant sets of coordinates for each
meta-analysis to determine regions of convergence within
emotional processing networks. Resultant ALE maps
(thresholded at FDR-corrected p<0.05, cluster thresholded
at 200mm3) were then qualitatively compared to identify
brain regions consistently involved across cultures during
emotional processing, and those that were culturespecific.
Our data support limited shared neural
components involved across all cultures, mainly
involving sub-lobar neural nodes such as the thalamus,
caudate, and claustrum. English and German ALE maps
showed the most convergence across a distributed
network
of
regions
including
the
amygdala,
parahippocampus (BA28), anterior cingulate (BA24/32),
inferior frontal gyrus (BA45/46), putamen, portions of the
thalamus, and left insula (BA13), with the Chinese ALE
map showing the most divergent (i.e., culture-specific)
results (e.g., precuneus [BA7], inferior parietal lobule
[BA39], right insula [BA13]). These results suggest that
cultural differences may exist at the neurophysiological
level in the processing of emotion, with support for more
independent cultures utilizing similar networks (e.g.,
Germans and English) compared to interdependent
cultures (e.g., Chinese). Data should be interpreted with
caution given the disparity in the number of studies
identified for each meta-analysis. Furthermore, future
studies should examine the effects of stimuli used (and
context) and how these effects may be mediated by
culture.
D-33
THE PROSPECTION AND RETROSPECTION OF
EVENTS GOOD AND BAD Paul Stillman, Ohio State
University; William Cunningham, University of Toronto, Ohio
State University - Both retrospection (remembering the
past) and prospection (imagining the future) are
important for our understanding of motivation and
emotion. Both of these processes are necessary for
building our affective trajectories and generating our
plans for the future (Cunningham, Dunfield, & Stillman,
in press), as well as helping motivate future action
(Seligman et al., in press; Packer & Cunningham, 2009).
Both of these perspectives, however, crucially implicate
not only whether one is looking to the past or future, but
the valence of these events. For example, when negative
affect is coupled with a past time perspective it is
associated with sadness, but when coupled with a future
perspective it can create fear and dread (Kirkland &
Cunningham, 2012). Similarly, different motivations may
arise depending on the valence and time perspective: we

may be drawn towards a positive future or propelled
from a negative past (Seligman et al., in press). While
prospection and retrospection have received a great deal
of attention, in the present study we examine not only the
processes of prospection and retrospection, but we
examine how these processes interact with the valence of
the imagery. Participants were first asked to generate
positive and negative experiences that either happened to
them in the past or could plausibly happen to them in the
future. Participants then imagined those events while
undergoing fMRI. In a 2x2 design, participants imagined
10
events
of
each
type
(future/past
and
positive/negative) for 32 seconds each.
Replicating
previous findings, positive imagery was associated with
medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and negative imagery
with lateral OFC and insula (Cunningham, Johnsen, &
Waggoner, 2010). Furthermore, our results suggest
greater medial prefrontal cortex activation for past events
versus greater ventral lateral PFC activation for future
events. Critically, we found a time perspective by valence
interaction in dorsal-medial PFC, medial OFC, and
subgenual cingulate. These interactions were such that
there was greater activation for past negative than past
positive events, but greater activation for future positive
than future negative events. This indicates that these areas
are most active when imagining past-negative or futurepositive events. These results may suggest an increase in
activity in regions particularly important for motivational
and emotional processing. One possible interpretation is
that these regions may be more sensitive to events that are
likely to produce motivational experience: past negative
events and future positive events may serve to motivate
people more than future negative and past positive,
which might generate feelings of despair and
complacency, respectively (Kirkland & Cunningham,
2012).
D-34
NEURAL ACTIVITY FOR THEORY OF MIND AND
ITS RELATIONSHIP TO DAY-TO-DAY SOCIAL
FUNCTIONING IN INDIVIDUALS AT FAMILIAL
HIGH-RISK FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA David Dodell-Feder,
Harvard University; Sarah Hope Lincoln, Harvard University;
Laura M. Tully, Harvard University; Lynn DeLisi, Brockton
VA Medical Center; Christine I. Hooker, Harvard University The ability to attribute and reason about the mental states
of others, otherwise known as theory of mind (ToM), is
foundational for effective social interaction. Individuals
with schizophrenia exhibit marked impairment in this
ability, along with the concomitant neural substrates
including temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), medial
prefrontal cortex (MPFC), and precuneus (PC). The
clinical and pathophysiological significance of these
findings are considerable given the strong relationship
between ToM deficits and real-world social functioning
deficits in schizophrenia. Increasing evidence has
documented similar, although more subtle ToM deficits in
unaffected first-degree relatives of individuals with
schizophrenia (i.e., those at familial high-risk [FHR]). In
these individuals, ToM deficits may act as an additional
vulnerability factor that contributes to the onset of illness
by creating additional social stress. However, many of

these behavioral findings are inconsistent and virtually
nothing is known about the neural bases of this ability in
FHR. Here, we ask whether the underlying neural
network for ToM is disrupted in FHR, and how these
neural differences may contribute to day-to-day social
functioning. FHR and matched nonFHR controls
underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while
performing the False-Belief task, and an additional ToM
task that required participants to read about a story
character’s thoughts, emotions, or physical appearances.
After scanning, participants completed a 28-day long
daily online questionnaire that asked participants to
report on ToM engagement and aspects of social
functioning including perspective taking, affective
empathy, social motivation, social contact, positive
socializing, negative socializing, and amount of conflict.
Whole-brain and individually tailored region-of-interest
analyses revealed that FHR demonstrated less
recruitment of key aspects of the ToM network including
right and left TPJ. Furthermore, across all participants,
greater recruitment of ToM brain regions for mental state
information (thoughts and emotions) versus non-mental
state information (appearances) predicted daily
engagement in ToM and aspects of social functioning.
Together, these data demonstrate that familial risk for
schizophrenia is associated with disruption to the
underlying neural network for ToM. Furthermore, neural
activity for ToM is related to daily social functioning,
suggesting that impaired brain function may act a
vulnerability
factor
in
the
development
of
psychopathology.
D-35
TOGETHER
IS
BETTER:
STUDYING
THE
PHYSIOLOGY OF INTERPERSONAL SYNCHRONY
Yulia Golland, IDC Herzliya; Uri Alon, Weizmann Institute of
Science; Nava Levit-binnun, IDC Herzliya; Lior Noy,
Weizmann Institute of Science - In recent years much
research has focused on a specific pattern of social
coordination - interpersonal synchrony. Studies have
shown that fine-grained temporal coordination between
two people occurs automatically and has specific
dynamical properties (e.g. Schmidt et al., 2011), and that
interpersonal synchrony promotes various forms of prosocial behavior, such as enhanced cooperation and
compassion (e.g. Valdesolo et al., 2011). While the
dynamic properties and the social consequences of
interpersonal synchrony are well studied, the biological
processes associated with interpersonal synchrony are
still poorly understood. The goal of the current study was
to explore the ongoing physiological processes
underlying profound interpersonal synchrony in an openended creative task. We recently developed a paradigm
to measure synchrony in a creative task based on a theater
exercise called the mirror game, where two actors mirror
each other, producing jointly synchronized motion (Noy
et al., 2011). We studied a simplified version of the game,
in which players produce linear motion traces by moving
handles along parallel tracks. Using a kinematic analysis
of the players’ motions we revealed a characteristic
leader-follower pattern in which the follower shows 23Hz oscillations around the leader’s smooth trajectory.

Importantly, we also detected periods during the game in
which the players enter a state of profound interpersonal
synchrony, showing smooth and highly synchronized
motion traces, without the characteristic leader-follower
pattern. We suggested that during these co-confident
motion periods players act as two leaders creating the
motion together. Here, we hypothesized that during such
co-confident motion periods in the mirror game, both the
behavioral and the physiological systems of the two
players become tightly coupled. Accordingly, we
expected that during these periods their physiological
activity would exhibit temporally coupled, joint response
patterns, that is, physiological coupling. To test this
hypothesis, we recorded the ongoing cardiovascular
activity of players during the mirror game, using a dyadic
physiological measurement setup. Six pairs of expert
improvisers played two games, composed of six twominute rounds. For each game round, we quantified the
rate of co-confident motion and the level of physiological
coupling, defined as the correlation of ongoing
cardiovascular activity of the two players. Although
players’ motion was synchronized throughout the game,
their physiological coupling showed vast variability
across different game rounds. In accordance with our
hypothesis, we found high significant correlation between
the rate of co-confident motion and the level of
physiological coupling. This result suggests that coconfident periods in the mirror game, that are
behaviorally characterized by high synchrony and a lack
of leader-follower pattern, are also physiologically
characterized by enhanced levels of cardiovascular
coupling between the two players. The mirror game is
used in the performing arts to enhance moments of
togetherness experienced by improvising performers. We
suggest that periods of co-confident motions in the
simplified version of the mirror game are associated with
such moments. If so, the presented research might
provide the first step toward a physiological description
of the state of togetherness.
D-36
NEURAL
AND
COGNITIVE
MECHANISMS
UNDERLYING THE ONTOGENY OF SOCIAL
DECISIONS DURING CHILDHOOD Nikolaus Steinbeis,
Max-Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences;
Boris C. Bernhardt, Max-Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences; Tania Singer, Max-Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, University of Zurich Human social development during childhood is marked
by considerable changes. For instance, children typically
display a tendency towards increased pro-sociality with
age. The neurocognitive mechanisms underlying this
change however remain poorly understood. In two
studies we examine the functional role of age-related
changes in impulse control and emotions arising out of
social comparison, such as envy and Schadenfreude in
bringing about observed changes in social behavior. In the
first study we investigated strategic social behavior using
two economic games in two groups of children (N = 146
and N = 28) aged 6 to 14 years and a group of adults, both
in- and outside the scanner. We found a significant agerelated increase in strategic social behavior, which was

mediated by developmental changes in an independent
measure of impulse control and associated brain functions
of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Further,
age-independent individual differences in brain structure
of the same portion of left DLPFC also predicted
individual differences in strategic behavior in the children
as well as the adult sample. In the second study we
examined whether developmental changes in the
experience of social emotions can account for changes in a
social preference known as inequity aversion. Using a
novel monetary reward-and-punishment task in 182
children aged 7-13 years we managed to induce feelings
of Schadenfreude (i.e. feeling better when winning and
seeing a competitor lose instead of also winning) and
envy (i.e. feeling worse when losing and seeing a
competitor win instead of also losing). Importantly, levels
of envy and Schadenfreude decreased with age.
Furthermore, we found that this development change in
social emotions significantly mediated an age-related
decrease in spiteful decisions made separately in the
context of three equity-related economic games. The data
from both studies suggest that age-related changes in
impulse control and associated activity in late maturing
cortical areas, as well as social emotions constitute two
distinct mechanisms which can account for changes in
social behavior during ontogeny.
D-37
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MORAL UPDATING
Jordan Theriault, Liane Young; Boston College - When we
judge an agent, we often encounter additional
information that leads us to update our initial impression
and change how we represent the mental states and
motivations of the agent. One signature of “moral
updating” (Monroe & Malle, in prep) then may be change
in neural activity within regions for social cognition or
theory of mind (ToM). To investigate moral updating,
we created scenarios featuring distinct moral tradeoffs.
Taboo tradeoffs typically pitted economic benefit over
people’s well-being (e.g., saving money for the hospital
versus a patient’s life). Tragic tradeoffs typically pitted
two sacred values against each other (e.g., saving one
patient’s life versus another). In the “reframed”
conditions, taboo and tragic tradeoffs were reframed as
tragic and taboo respectively (i.e., taboo-tragic, tragictaboo) with the addition of new information about the
implications of the protagonist’s choice (e.g., saving
money would allow other patients’ lives to be saved;
saving one patient would lead to his family’s donating
money to the hospital). In the control conditions, new
filler information was provided (i.e., taboo-filler, tragicfiller). Scenarios were presented to participants in the
scanner in cumulative segments; each story segment
appeared for 10 seconds before the next segment was
presented. Each participant viewed 24 scenarios; each
scenario appeared in only one condition for each
participant. All four conditions (taboo-tragic, tragic-taboo,
taboo-filler, tragic-filler) were distinguishable in the final
segment of the story. Participants rated each scenario on a
4-point scale, i.e. “How wrong?” We focused on regions
of interest (ROIs) for theory of mind (ToM). Using an
independent task, we localized right/left temporo-

parietal junction (RTPJ/LTPJ), right/left superior
temporal sulcus (RSTS/LSTS), precuneus, and dorsal
medial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC). When moral
dilemmas were first introduced, only LSTS differentiated
between tragic and taboo tradeoffs, showing greater
activity for taboo tradeoffs. However, as new information
was introduced, precuneus showed greater activation for
both reframed conditions (taboo-tragic, tragic-taboo)
compared to the matched control (filler) conditions. LTPJ
showed a similar effect: greater activation for tragic-taboo
over tragic-filler. Multi-voxel pattern analyses (MVPA)
allowed us to examine whether condition differences
could be distinguished by the within-region spatial
pattern of activity across voxels. When scenarios were
reframed,
taboo-tragic
versus
taboo-filler
was
distinguished in the LTPJ, RTPJ, and LSTS, whereas the
tragic-taboo versus tragic-filler distinction was not
encoded in any region. All condition differences were
encoded in the DMPFC when participants delivered
moral judgments. These regions thus appear to be
sensitive to whether information demands moral
updating or not. At the broadest level, the current results
suggest that brain regions for ToM support moral
updating. The precuneus is recruited robustly when
moral updating is demanded, consistent with prior work
on the neural correlates of impression formation, whereas
other regions show neural discriminability in their spatial
pattern of activity.
D-38
PAIN, PAIN GO AWAY: VISUAL PERSPECTIVE AND
THE EMBODIMENT OF IMAGINED SENSORY
EXPERIENCES Brittany M. Christian, University of
Aberdeen; Carolyn Parkinson, Dartmouth College; Thalia
Wheatley, Dartmouth College; Lynden K. Miles, University of
Aberdeen; Neil Macrae, University of Aberdeen - The
uniquely human capacity to mentally transcend the ‘here
and now’ affords the opportunity to relive former
pleasures or preview the perils of things to come. These
imaginary sensory experiences take on a realistic form,
faithfully reproducing the neural, cognitive and
behavioural consequences that accompany their actual
occurrence. This embodiment makes mental simulations
an adaptive training ground for future behaviour.
However, there are occasions when physiological
responses to imaginary events are problematic.
Embodying the pain of a tooth extraction, for instance,
could have aversive emotional and behavioural outcomes.
Might we be able to buffer ourselves from this by altering
the characteristics of the mental simulation? While
previous work has demonstrated that the perception of
pain is decreased when imagining it is happening to
another person, the current study focused on the potential
efficacy of third person self simulations at reducing the
extent to which imaginary painful scenarios are
embodied. Using fMRI we measured the spontaneous
neural response to hypothetical painful scenarios across
three distinct visual perspectives (First Person Self, Third
Person Self, Unfamiliar Other). Additionally, participants
rated the perceived pain and disembodiment associated
with each vantage point. Whole brain contrasts revealed
that first person self simulations resulted in greater

activation of regions associated with experiencing and
observing pain (e.g., right insula), compared to equivalent
third person self simulations. Participants’ reports
supported these findings, explicating significant
differences between first and third self conditions in
ratings of perceived pain and disembodiment. Taken
together, the current results emphasize the effectiveness
of utilizing a third person self perspective as a distancing
technique to reduce the embodiment of imaginary pain.
Further, they suggest that visual perspective is a unique
boundary condition that moderates the embodied nature
of imaginary sensory experiences.
D-39
SOCIAL INFLUENCE REGULATES EMOTIONAL
REACTIVITY Rebecca E. Martin, Peter J. Franz, Kevin N.
Ochsner; Columbia University - Famous experiments like
the Asch line paradigm have examined how group
behavior can shape an individual’s beliefs and
perceptions. Few studies, however, have focused on how
social influence can serve to regulate an individual’s
emotional state. In the current study we examined how
social influence impacts emotional reactivity.
To
accomplish this we used two tasks aimed at eliciting two
distinct types of affective responses: (1) appetitive
reactivity to food and (2) emotional reactivity to positive,
negative, and neutral social scenes. In the appetitive task,
participants rated images of food on a 1 to 7 scale to
indicate how much they liked the taste of that food. In
the social task, participants rated positive, negative, and
neutral images of social situations on a 1 to 7 scale to
indicate how bad or good the image made them feel. In
both tasks, following their rating, participants either
received feedback and were shown what they believed to
be a group rating from a normative sample of 100 peers,
or they received no feedback at all. After a rest period
participants then rated the images a second time, this time
without peer feedback. We assessed social influence by
comparing the degree to which ratings changed as a
function of the peer ratings. For both tasks, we found a
robust conformity effect, i.e. participants significantly
changed their ratings to conform to the peer ratings.
Interestingly, in both tasks, there was a positivity bias
such that ratings changed the most when peer ratings
were more positive. There was no significant change in
ratings when participants received no peer feedback, nor
when their ratings matched the peer ratings. Future
directions include examining developmental differences
in sensitivity to peer influence. Additionally, we will use
fMRI to assess how conformity might attenuate or
enhance neural regions associated with appetitive
reactivity (e.g. ventral striatum) and emotional reactivity
(e.g. amygdala).
D-40
DEFAULT
NETWORK
PHASE
LOCKING
MODULATES
PERFORMANCE
PERCEPTIONS
UNDER STEREOTYPE THREAT Jordan B. Leitner, Kelly
Jordan, Adam Magerman, Chad E. Forbes; University of
Delaware - Stereotype threat is a situational pressure that
stereotyped targets experience when they fear their

actions may confirm a negative group stereotype.
Stereotype threat has been shown to increase anxiety, bias
performance monitoring, and decrease performance. Less
is known, however, about how individual differences in
self-oriented processing, and default states of neural
activity associated with self-oriented processing, buffers
stigmatized individuals from negative perceptions often
experienced under stereotype threat. We investigated the
role of self-oriented processing in stereotype threat by
examining neural synchrony between default network
(DN) regions prior to performance. The DN is a brain
system comprised of multiple brain regions that exhibit
collective increases in neural activity when individuals
are more internally focused, and decreases in neural
activity when individuals are more externally focused. An
emerging hypothesis is that the DN increases cognitive
flexibility, and thus the ability to cope with upcoming
events before they happen. Supportive of this hypothesis,
greater DN activity has been linked to an enhanced ability
to envision the detail and emotional content of future
events. Given such relationships between the DN and
internal mentation, the DN may play an integral role in
the extent to which stigmatized individuals interpret their
performance under stereotype threat. We hypothesized
that differential synchrony between regions in the DN
biases stigmatized individuals’ performance monitoring
perceptions under stereotype threat. Continuous EEG was
recorded from 43 Whites and 49 racial minorities during a
five minute rest period. DN synchrony was indexed by
calculating the phase locking between left lateral parietal
cortex (LPC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and ventral
anterior cingulate cortex (vACC) over 400ms epochs in
theta, alpha, beta and gamma frequency bands. After the
rest period, participants completed a probabilistic
learning task that provided comparable amounts of
positive and negative feedback. To prime stereotype
threat, all participants were told that the probabilistic
learning task was diagnostic of their natural intelligence,
and were asked to indicate their race. Following the task,
participants estimated the number of errors they thought
they made on the supposed intelligence task. Error
estimations were converted to an accuracy index that
accounted for the number of errors participants actually
made. Participants also reported the degree of doubt they
were experiencing, and their SAT scores.
Results
indicated that DN phase locking at rest differentially
modulated the extent to which Minorities and Whites
perceived their performance under stereotype threat.
Whites with greater DN phase locking (in all frequency
bands) reported making more errors than they actually
made. In contrast, Minorities with greater DN phase
locking reported making fewer errors than they actually
made.
Greater DN phase locking also predicted
decreased post-task doubt for Minorities only. Finally,
greater DN phase locking was related to increased math
SAT scores for Minorities, but not Whites. These findings
suggest that individual differences in DN phase locking
and self-related processing can attenuate or exacerbate the
negative performance perceptions experienced in
stereotype threatening situations and have implications
for performance on tests of intellectual merit.

D-41
PRIMING RELIGION ERASES PREFERENCES FOR
GROUPS: AN N400 STUDY Julian Wills, Jamie Morris,
Lane Beckes; University of Virginia - Prior research
demonstrates that priming religion reduces temptation
and increases generosity, yet the mechanisms of these
findings remain unclear. One hypothesis is that religion
suppresses selfishness and stimulates group-level
cooperation, or “groupishness.” Using event-related
potentials, the present study sought to confirm whether
priming religion increases group preferences. Once
primed, participants viewed sentences that either
endorsed groups over individuals (group-affirming) or
endorsed individuals over groups (group-denying).
Whether a sentence was group-affirming or groupdenying hinged on the final word (e.g. “prioritizing
groups over individuals is necessary/wrong”). By
presenting sentences one word at a time, we examined the
N400 component after the final word of each sentence
was displayed. The N400, a negative deflection occurring
roughly 400ms after a stimulus, is a reliable index of
semantic incongruity - a larger N400 is produced if a
sentence ends unexpectedly (e.g. “I take my coffee with
cream and sugar/dog”). Moreover, studies indicate that
moral statements can produce larger N400s depending on
one’s political party: liberals will elicit larger N400s after
viewing statements that endorse conservative opinions,
and vice versa. Thus, if religion increases groupishness,
we predicted that priming religion would increase the
N400 amplitude after viewing group-denying sentences.
We discovered a main effect whereby all participants,
regardless of the prime, elicited significantly larger N400s
after viewing group-denying statements compared to
group-affirming statements. Moreover we discovered an
interaction in the opposite direction as predicted:
compared to unprimed participants, primed participants
produced significantly smaller N400s after viewing
group-denying sentences. Exploratory analyses revealed
that primed participants also exhibited N400 latency
differences. Prior research has shown that priming
religion may impact self-control processes, and therefore
it is possible that our results are due to differences in
motivation or attentiveness to the task. As a result, we are
now conducting a follow-up study to test whether
priming religion may impact self-regulatory neural
processing.
D-42
AN ASSESSMENT OF WORKING MEMORY AND
REWARD LEARNING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA USING
THE N-BACK TASK AND A PROBABILISTIC
REWARD-LEARNING PARADIGM Sergio Francis M.
Zenisek, Jenna Reinen, Edward Smith; Columbia University Schizophrenia involves abnormalities in dopamine
signaling and is characterized by affective and
motivational deficits, which make it more difficult for
patients with the disease to work toward obtaining
rewarding outcomes. Patients with the disease also show
working-memory deficits. Teasing apart these different
effects can be a challenge, because deficits in affect and
motivation and deficits in WM can both impair
performance on tasks. The n-back task is one commonly

used cognitive assessment involving continuous
recognition and updating of information. In it, subjects
are presented a series of stimuli and asked whether the
current stimulus matches the one presented “n” items
previously. Because it necessitates dynamic interaction
with stimuli with the goal of maintaining a changing set
of information, the n-back task has become widely used
as a WM measure. Reward learning, on the other hand,
can be assessed using a probabilistic learning task. This
type of learning is thought to rely upon dopamine
signaling, and may underlie some forms of motivated and
goal-directed behavior. Some data suggest that abnormal
dopamine signaling in patients with schizophrenia results
in deficits in planning and goal-oriented behavior. In
addition, WM deficits are related to PFC function and
may be related to dopaminergic deficits. Because of this,
we aimed to examine the relationship between
performance on the n-back task and performance on a
reward-learning task in healthy subjects. In order to
examine the relationships between symptoms, WM, and
RL ability in schizophrenia and to investigate the
relationship between motivation and WM, we tested
schizophrenia patients (n=26) and healthy controls (n=22)
on these two task types. We had participants perform a
reward-learning task in which they had to learn which of
two stimuli was more likely to lead to a reward, either
money in the gain portion or a reduced penalty in the loss
portion. Participants were also tested on a classic n-back
task (2- and 3-back) and these results were compared.
Performance was compared to symptom ratings for the
patients. Results show that controls performed better than
patients on the n-back task overall (p<0.05), which is
consistent with prior evidence. Further, affectiveflattening symptom ratings in patients correlated with
longer n-back reaction times (p<0.05), which may be
indicative of a motivational deficit. Comparisons with the
RL task show that reaction time on the n-back task was
strongly negatively correlated with optimal choice
performance on the RL task in the loss condition for
healthy controls only (p<0.01), also suggesting that
motivational deficits in schizophrenia are related to
planning and reward-seeking deficits in patients.
Together, these results suggest that aspects of the n-back
task may differentially predict components of rewardlearning ability. In sum, these data suggest that there are
significant interactions between WM capacity as
measured with the n-back task and reward-seeking ability
as assessed using an RL task.
D-43
ASSOCIATIONS OF THE OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR
GENE (OXTR) POLYMORPHISMS WITH BRAIN
RESPONSE DURING READING OF FACIAL
EMOTIONS IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Natalie
C. Ebner, University of Florida; Gabriela Maura, University of
Florida; Lars Westberg, University of Gothenburg; Håkan
Fischer, Stockholm University, Karolinska Institute - The
ability to correctly read emotions in others is central for
successful social interaction. Still, relatively little is known
about the processes underlying this important social skill.
In the present study, we used a genetics, functional brain
imaging, and cognitive-behavioral approach to examine

associations of the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) with
brain activity and behavioral response during reading of
facial emotions in samples of young and older adults.
OXTR has been implicated as a candidate gene for
interindividual differences in various social phenotypes.
Twenty-five young (aged: 20-31 years) and 28 older (aged:
65-74 years) participants underwent functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) while identifying expressions
in happy, neutral, and angry young and older faces.
Participants were genotyped for 15 OXTR SNPs (single
nucleotide polymorphisms), which have previously been
shown to be associated with social behavior. Of these, the
most promising associations were found in relation to
rs237887. Twenty (10 young and 10 older) participants
were identified as carriers of two A-alleles (AA) and 33
(15 young and 18 older) participants as carriers of at least
one G-allele (GA/GG) regarding rs237887. Examination
of associations between these genotypes and brain
activity during facial emotion identification demonstrated
that individuals carrying a G-allele compared to AAgenotype carriers showed increased activity in left
fusiform gyrus, right inferior frontal gyrus, and right
middle frontal gyrus during reading of emotional
expressions in happy compared to angry faces, while also
showing decreased activity in bilateral anterior cingulate
cortex. In addition, G-allele compared to AA-genotype
carriers were slower labeling happy (but not angry) faces
and reported greater attention to and clarity of their own
feelings and emotions in a Likert-type self-report
measure. Intriguingly, in this context, rs237887 has
previously been demonstrated to be associated with
susceptibility for autism spectrum disorder (Liu et al.,
2010), prosocial behavior (Israel et al., 2009, but see
Apicella et al., 2010), and face recognition (Lori et al.,
2012). Looking at young and older participants separately,
several of these observed associations were more
pronounced in older than young participants. This is an
interesting finding given broad evidence of preferential
processing of positive over negative information in older
compared to young adults (Mather & Carstensen, 2005).
To our knowledge this is the first study that considers
young and older participants in a genetic-neurobehavioral examination of facial emotion processing.
Results will be discussed in the context of OXTR gene
function and brain regions involved in face and emotion
processing (Haxby et al., 2000, 2002). These findings shed
light on interactions between genetics, psychological
processes,
and
neural
structures
involved
in
socioemotional functioning. They also importantly
contribute to the still very sparse and inconclusive
literature on age-related changes in oxytocin function in
social-affective contexts.
D-44
CORTICAL ACTIVATION DURING A FOOD
DECISION-MAKING TASK CORRELATES WITH
WILLINGNESS
TO
PAY
TO
AVOID
CONTROVERSIAL FOOD TECHNOLOGIES J. Bradley
C. Cherry, University of Missouri-Kansas City; Jayson L. Lusk,
Oklahoma State University; Brandon R. McFadden, Oklahoma
State University; John M. Crespi, Kansas State University;
Laura E. Martin, University of Kansas Medical Center;

Amanda S. Bruce, University of Missouri-Kansas City Objective: Little is known about consumer decisionmaking between foods produced using new, controversial
food technologies and those produced using more
conventional alternatives. In this study, we examined the
relationship between participants’ cortical activations
during a food decision-making task and their willingness
to pay (WTP) to avoid controversial food technologies,
including the use of artificial growth hormone (rBGH) to
produce milk. We hypothesized that, when participants
made decisions about whether to purchase low-priced
milk produced using rBGH or high-priced milk produced
without using rBGH, higher activation levels in areas
associated with risk assessment and deliberate decisionmaking would correlate significantly with higher WTP to
avoid milk produced using rBGH. Methods: We recruited
47 healthy participants (23 females; aged 18-55 years; M =
31.9 years) from the Kansas City area to undergo two
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) scans. During these scans, participants performed
a food decision-making task in which we presented them
with a total of 84 choices between two types of milk. The
two options presented in each choice differed according
to three experimental conditions: a “price” condition, in
which the price of one option was high, and the other
low, but the technologies used to produce them were the
same; a “technology” condition, in which the technology
used to produce one option was controversial, and the
other conventional, but their prices were the same; and a
“combination” condition, in which the prices of the two
options differed, as did the technologies used to produce
them. Analysis: We used BrainVoyager QX to conduct a
whole-brain analysis contrasting participants’ cortical
activations during combination choices versus price
choices. We then used SPSS and SAS to estimate
participants’ WTP to avoid milk produced using rBGH.
Activation levels were measured in terms of percent
blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal change,
while WTP to avoid milk produced using rBGH was
measured in terms of United States dollars. We again
used BrainVoyager QX to conduct a whole-brain
correlation of participants’ activation levels and WTP to
avoid milk produced using rBGH. Results: Activation
levels correlated significantly (p < .01, cluster threshold =
15 voxels) with WTP to avoid milk produced using rBGH,
with a positive correlation being observed along the right
central insular sulcus, spreading both anteriorly and
posteriorly (BA 13; x = 35, y = -5, z = 9; r = 0.55).
Discussion: Consistent with our hypothesis, we observed
a significant correlation between higher activation levels
in areas associated with risk assessment and deliberate
decision-making (i.e., right anterior and posterior insula)
and higher WTP to avoid milk produced using rBGH.
Similar activation levels in the right insula have been
observed by studies examining cortical activations during
decision-making tasks involving risk assessment.
Limitations to this study include the use of a single food
product and, according to eight participants, the use of
somewhat unrealistic prices. Future studies may use a
wider variety of both food and non-food products, as well
as a more realistic range of prices.

D-45 *SANS Poster Award Winner
EFFECTS OF PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL SEX
STEROID HORMONES ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF
AUTISTIC TRAITS IN CHILDREN AT 18-24 MONTHS
OF AGE Bonnie Auyeung, University of Cambridge; Jag
Ahluwalia, Rosie Maternity Hospital; Lynn Thomson, Rosie
Maternity Hospital; Kevin Taylor, Addenbrooke's Hospital;
Gerald Hackett, Rosie Maternity Hospital; Kieran J.
O'Donnell, McGill University; Simon Baron-Cohen,
University of Cambridge - Background: It has been
suggested that autism may be an extreme manifestation of
specific (but not all) male-typical traits, both in terms of
cognition and neuroanatomy. Studies of prenatal
exposure to sex steroid hormones during critical periods
of development are related to specific (but not all)
sexually dimorphic aspects of cognition and behaviour.
However, it is not known whether postnatal exposure to
these hormones has a similar effect. The critical periods
for sexual differentiation of the brain are thought to be
when sex differences in serum levels of sex steroids (e.g.,
testosterone) are highest. During human development,
there is a prenatal surge in testosterone at around weeks
8-24 of gestation and a postnatal (neonatal) surge is also
thought to occur shortly after birth when the child reaches
3-4 months of age. Objectives: To examine how prenatal
and postnatal sex steroid hormone levels are associated
with individual differences in autistic traits in 18-24
month old children. Methods: Fetal testosterone (fT) and
fetal estradiol (fE) levels were measured in amniotic fluid
using radioimmunoassay from pregnant women
following routine second-trimester amniocentesis in
n=129 toddlers. Saliva samples were collected from a
subset of these children (n=35) when they reached 3-4
months of age. Salivary samples were assayed (without
separation or extraction) for neonatal testosterone (nT)
levels using commercially available immunoassay
protocols. When the children reached 18-24 months of
age, mothers were asked to complete the Quantitative
Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (Q-CHAT), a measure
which has been shown to be effective in detecting the
presence of autistic traits.
Results: fT levels were
positively associated with scores on the Q-CHAT. For the
smaller subset of children for which nT was measured, nT
levels showed no significant sex differences and no
relationships with FT levels or with Q-CHAT scores. The
same subset retained the relationship between fT levels
and Q-CHAT scores, despite the smaller sample size.
Conclusions: These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that prenatal (but not postnatal) androgen
exposure (coinciding with a critical phase in sexual
differentiation of the brain) is associated with the
development of autistic traits in 18-24 month old toddlers.
The present results should be followed up in a larger
sample to examine whether individuals with clinical
diagnoses of autism had elevated levels of fT.
D-46
COGNITIVE
EMPATHY
MODULATES
THE
PROCESSING OF PRAGMATIC CONSTRAINTS
DURING SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Sai Li,
Xiaoming Jiang, Hongbo Yu, Jie Hu, Xiaolin Zhou; Peking

University - Previous studies showed that brain regions
for mentalizing, including temporoparietal junction (TPJ)
and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), are activated in
understanding the non-literal meaning of sentences. A
different set of brain regions, including left inferior frontal
gyrus (IFG), is activated for dealing with pragmatic
incongruence. Here we demonstrate that individual’s
cognitive empathic ability modulates the brain activity
underlying the processing of pragmatic constraints
during sentence comprehension. The “dou” construction
in Chinese (similar to English even) normally describes an
event of low expectedness; it also introduces a pragmatic
scale against which the implicature of an underspecified
event can be inferred. By embedding underspecified or
highly likely events in the construction, we created
underspecified and incongruent sentences and compared
both with control sentences in which events of low
expectedness were described. Imaging results showed
that 1) left TPJ was activated for the underspecified
sentences, and the activity in ventral mPFC correlated
with individuals’ fantasizing ability; 2) anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) was activated for the incongruent sentences,
and the activity in bilateral IFG correlated with
individuals’ perspective taking ability. These findings
suggest that brain activations in making pragmatic
inference and in dealing with pragmatic failure are
modulated by different components of cognitive
empathy.
D-47
COORDINATED
LARGE-SCALE
NETWORKS
UNDERLIE AFFECTIVE EXPERIENCE ACROSS
DISCRETE EMOTION CATEGORIES Christine WilsonMendenhall, Northeastern University, Massachusetts General
Hospital; Gal Raz, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv
University; Alexandra Touroutoglou, Massachusetts General
Hospital; Shir Atzil, Northeastern University, Massachusetts
General Hospital; Yael Jacob, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical
Center; Gadi Gilam,Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel
Aviv University; Tamar Lin, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical
Center, Tel Aviv University; Tal Gonen, Tel Aviv Sourasky
Medical Center, Tel Aviv University; Roee Admon, Tel Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv University; Talma Hendler,
Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv University,
McLean Hospital; Lisa Feldman Barrett, Northeastern
University, Massachusetts General Hospital - Psychological
construction approaches to emotion suggest that
interacting neural systems produce countless possible
emotional experiences. Because emotions emerge from
more basic domain-general “ingredients” in this view, a
straightforward neural hypothesis is that common neural
systems should contribute to the subjective experience of
different discrete emotions (e.g., sadness, anger, fear). In
this work, we examined the connectivity between largescale networks during emotional experiences cultivated as
participants watched films clips 5-10 minutes in length.
Film clips are ideal for inducing emotions in an
experimental context because they elicit strong subjective
and physiological changes by introducing dynamic, realword social situations.
Across several studies,
participants either viewed two sadness-inducing clips, an
anger-inducing clip, or a fear-inducing clip during an

fMRI session. They then watched the clip a second time
while making continuous intensity ratings of the target
emotion (e.g., intensity of sadness on a moment-tomoment basis).
To examine the brain networks
contributing to the dynamic emergence of emotions
during the films, we used newly developed analysis
techniques for assessing functional connectivity within
and between networks across time.
The resulting
“cohesion” indices reflect both the strength of average
correlations between signals in a group of regions and the
variation about this average (i.e., higher values indicate
correlations that are narrowly distributed about a high
average) across specified time windows.
We
hypothesized that the cohesion between large-scale
resting state networks identified in our previous work
would increase as participants’ continuous emotional
intensity ratings increased in each of the four film clips
(and across three discrete emotion categories). More
specifically, we assessed the cohesion between an insulabased “salience” network (e.g., anterior insula, anterior
cingulate) that is anatomically positioned to coordinate
attention, awareness, and action and an amygdala-based
network (e.g., amygdala, ventromedial prefrontal cortex,
ventral striatum) that is anatomically positioned to
coordinate affective changes grounded in the body. As
hypothesized, the strength of connectivity between these
networks predicted sadness intensity ratings, anger
intensity ratings, and fear intensity ratings during the film
clips that targeted these emotions. We suggest that these
networks coordinate when signals from the body
influence attention to a self-relevant situation in the
world, which is subjectively experienced as heightened
emotional intensity across discrete emotion categories. In
the case of film clips, the social situation becomes selfrelevant through the viewer’s vicarious connection with
the characters. Moving beyond investigations that focus
on discriminating prototypical discrete emotions, our
findings suggest that it is productive to examine how
basic neural systems coordinate to produce the diverse
experiences that characterize human emotional life.
D-48
REWARD SENSITIVITY TO FACES VERSUS
OBJECTS IN CHILDREN: AN SPN STUDY Katherine
Kuhl-Meltzoff Stavropoulos, Leslie J. Carver; University of
California, San Diego - Social behavior is partially
motivated by the rewards we experience when engaging
with others. Understanding the neural underpinnings of
the reward system is crucial for knowing how social
behavior develops, and how social systems sometimes
fail. One method to study the reward system is event
related potentials (ERPs). The stimulus preceding
negativity (SPN) ERP component occurs when subjects
anticipate feedback about performance on a task in which
correct responses yield a reward. The SPN is thought to
reflect the expectation of reward, and related activity of
the dopaminergic reward system (van Boxtel & Bocker,
2004). Adult studies have elicited the SPN component
during a guessing task with monetary rewards, finding
larger SPNs when subjects felt control over the outcome
(Masaki, Yamazaki, & Hackley, 2010), and were highly
motivated. Although the SPN has been studied in adults,

it has yet to be examined with children. Further, in
previous studies, monetary rewards were compared
directly with social rewards (e.g., pictures of faces)
(Ditchter et al., 2012). This could lead to differences
between conditions that are due to differences in
characteristics of the rewards, ones not related to their
value as social stimuli (e.g., perceptual differences
between symbols that represent monetary reward versus
faces or cognitive differences between the expectation of
gaining money versus simply seeing faces). In the current
study, we examined SPN activity in children, while
controlling for the rewards between conditions. As in
previous studies, we used a guessing task to elicit the
SPN. However, the reward in the present study was
consistent across trials, but was accompanied by an
incidental stimulus that was either social or nonsocial in
nature.
Participants were told that correct answers
would be signaled by a ring of intact goldfish crackers
(which served as the reward), and incorrect answers
would be signaled with a ring of goldfish crackers with
X’s drawn through them. In the social condition, there
was a face inside the ring of goldfish that was either
smiling (for correct answers), or frowning (for incorrect
answers). In the nonsocial reward condition the directions
were identical. However, an arrow comprised of
scrambled faces was inside the ring of goldfish (the arrow
pointed upwards for correct answers and downwards for
incorrect answers). Our results (N = 11, 5 female 6 male,
mean = 7.44 years) suggest two noteworthy findings: 1.
The SPN is elicited in children during a guessing game
task, and 2. In children, the SPN is larger in blocks where
feedback is accompanied by a social stimulus compared
to those with nonsocial incidental feedback (p = .039).
These results provide important evidence that even when
the reward is identical across conditions, and the social
and nonsocial rewards are incidental, the SPN is larger to
feedback paired with social stimuli. This line of research
is important for advancing our current understanding of
social motivation in typically developing children, as well
as raising interesting questions for how this component
might be altered in children with social deficits, such as
autism.
D-49
RECRUITMENT OF COGNITIVE AND AFFECTIVE
BRAIN
NETWORKS
DEPENDS
ON
THE
INTERACTION
BETWEEN
SEROTONIN
TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE AND EMOTIONAL
VALENCE DURING BELIEF-BIAS INTERFERENCE IN
REASONING Melanie Stollstorff, University of Colorado
Boulder; Marie T. Banich, University of Colorado Boulder;
Ryan M. Guild, University of Colorado Boulder; Harry R.
Smolker, University of Colorado Boulder; Arielle P. C. Jensen,
University of Colorado Boulder; Joseph M. Devaney,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences; Yuko Munakata, University
of Colorado Boulder - Our genes affect our susceptibility to
positive and negative emotional biases which in turn
influence our ability to reason logically under differenct
contexts. Specifically, individuals with the long allele
form of the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) tend
to emphasize negatively-valenced context, while those
with the short form react to positively-valenced context.

Belief-bias, a common source of error in everyday
reasoning, can be heightened by emotional reactivity.
While increased belief-bias is associated with reduced
activation of the right inferior frontal cortex (rIFC), the
neural basis for 5-HTTLPR-mediated differences in the
ability to exert inhibitory control over bottom-up biases in
reasoning is unknown, an issue investigated in this study.
Two groups of healthy adults (based on 5-HTTLPR
genotype: “Long”, “Short”), underwent fMRI while
completing a reasoning task that varied in congruency of
task-relevant (logic) and task-irrelevant (beliefs)
information and in emotional valence. Results revealed
that genotype influenced brain regions engaged
depending on emotional valence. While the Long group
had increased rIFC and amygdala activity during positive
emotional conflict, the Short group recruited these regions
during negative emotional conflict. Thus, participants
successfully engaged cognitive control regions to
overcome bottom-up emotional biases using similar
neural circuitry, but the engagement of this circuitry
depended on emotional valence and 5-HTTLPR status.
Thus, susceptibility to reasoning bias depends on
emotional valence and is modulated, in part, by a genetic
polymorphism
that
influences
serotonin
neurotransmission.
D-50
CORTICAL
PROCESSING
OF
EMOTIONAL
VALENCE AND INTENSITY IN HUMAN AND
ANIMAL VOCALIZATIONS Attila Andics, Eötvös Loránd
University, Semmelweis University; Márta Gácsi, Eötvös
Loránd University; Tamás Faragó, Eötvös Loránd University;
Anna Kis, Eötvös Loránd University, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences; Ádám Miklósi, Eötvös Loránd University Emotional voice processing was shown to involve distinct
regions along the posterior and anterior superior
temporal sulcus (STS), in the inferior frontal cortex (IFC)
and the amygdala bilaterally (e.g., Fecteau et al., 2007.
Neuroimage. 36:480-487; Ethofer et al., 2012. Cereb
Cortex. 22:191-200). But the exact role of these brain areas
in processing vocal emotions is still unclear. It is also not
known if there are systematic hemispheric asymmetries
for voice processing that can be attributed to emotional
content. According to the right-hemisphere hypothesis,
the right half of the brain is dominant for processing all
emotions. According to the valence hypothesis, positive
emotions are processed predominantly in the left
hemisphere, and negative emotions predominantly in the
right hemisphere. These proposals received considerable
attention but little neuroscientific support so far (e.g.,
Killgore and Yurgelun-Todd, 2007. Soc Cogn Affect
Neurosci. 2:240-250), and almost none in the auditory
domain.
Here, twenty-two human listeners were
presented with human and dog emotional vocalizations,
and nonvocal sounds (all amplitudes normalized) in an
fMRI experiment. All vocal stimuli were previously rated
for perceived emotional valence and intensity. Stimuli
were blocked, every block consisted of four similarly
rated stimuli. First, we used parametric modulation
analyses to test what brain regions’ activity covaries with
perceived emotional valence and intensity. Second, we
modeled every stimulus block with a separate regressor,

and tested if hemispheric asymmetries in specific brain
regions covary with the perceptual scores. We found that
the perceived emotional valence of both human and dog
vocalizations positively correlated with activity in
bilateral STS, that is, more positive stimuli elicited
stronger STS responses. Furthermore, the perceived
emotional intensity of human but not of dog stimuli
positively correlated with activity in right IFC, that is,
emotionally more intense stimuli elicited stronger IFC
responses. Systematic hemispheric differences were also
identified: the perceived emotional valence of human
vocalizations positively correlated with the amount of a
leftward bias in neural activity in both the amygdala and
the voice-selective STS. That is, more positive stimuli led
to relatively more left (compared to right) amygdala and
STS activity. Our results confirmed previous findings
suggesting that emotional valence and intensity modulate
distinct stages of the voice processing hierarchy.
Furthermore, we demonstrated here that emotional
valence, whether conveyed by human or dog
vocalizations, is processed by similar voice-selective
superior temporal regions in the human brain. This
suggests that the same neural networks that are used to
process human voice emotions can be used when
processing animal vocalizations. Finally, our study is
among the first ones to show neuroimaging evidence in
the auditory domain for valence-based functional
hemispheric asymmetries. Our findings also demonstrate
that the right prefrontal cortex is more sensitive to vocal
emotional intensity than the left prefrontal cortex,
indicating that the valence hypothesis may not hold for all
cerebral regions involved in emotion processing.
Therefore, we propose an integrated account, with a
crucial role of the voice-sensitive STS and IFC regions in
processing vocal emotions.
D-51
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN COGNITIVE LOAD,
WORKING MEMORY, AND ONLINE USAGE OF
THEORY OF MIND IN ADOLESCENTS AND
ADULTS Kathryn L. Mills, University College London and
National Institute of Mental Health; Iroise Dumontheil,
University of London; Sarah-Jayne Blakemore, University
College London - The ability to use knowledge about
another person's mental state has been shown to depend
on the availability of cognitive resources. Using a
referential communication task, Lin and colleagues (2010)
found that adults under high cognitive load were less able
to use the knowledge of another individual than those
under low cognitive load, suggesting that sufficient
cognitive resources are necessary to spontaneously use
one\'s theory of mind. In a separate experiment using the
same referential communication task, individuals with
high working memory capacity were better at
appropriately using theory of mind than individuals with
low working memory capacity. This suggests individual
differences in cognitive resources affect the ability to use
knowledge about another individual’s mental states
during real-time interactions (Lin et al., 2010). The
“Director task” is a computerized version of the
referential communication task used by Lin and
colleagues, where participants must either use theory of

mind, or follow an arbitrary non-social rule, to move
objects in a set of shelves. The ability to use theory of
mind in the Director task improves into adulthood, over
and above the maturation of other cognitive processes
involved, such as response inhibition (Dumontheil et al.,
2010). In the present study, we examined how the
availability of cognitive resources interacts with theory of
mind use in adolescence compared to adults. We used an
adapted version of the Director task (Dumontheil et al.,
2012) and manipulated cognitive load by asking
participants to remember either one or three two-digit
numbers before each Director task trial and to retrieve
this information at the end of the trial. Participants also
completed a backward verbal digit span task as an
independent measure of working memory capacity. Data
from young adolescents (11-14 years), mid-adolescents
(14-17 years), and adults (22-30 years) were analyzed to
investigate developmental differences in the interaction
between cognitive load and online theory of mind usage,
as well as the influence of working memory capacity on
both. We examined how cognitive load affected
performance on the Director task, how the Director task
affected performance on the embedded working memory
task, and the influence of working memory capacity on
these interactions. The results inform our knowledge of
the interplay between social cognition and domaingeneral working memory processes during development.
D-52
WHY ARE YOU SMILING? IN A STRATEGIC
CONTEXT, PEOPLE’S FACIAL RESPONSES REFLECT
THE
MEANING
OF
ANDROID
FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS Galit Hofree, Paul Ruvolo, Christopher
Reinert, Marian S. Bartlett, Piotr Winkielman; University of
California, San Diego - Facial expressions are essential for
human emotional communication. Interestingly, humans,
and some other primates, have been found to
spontaneously mimic such facial expressions (Dimberg,
1982; McIntosh, Decker, Winkielman, & Wilbarger, 2006;
Ross, Menzler, & Zimmermann, 2009). This automatic
behavior appears to be important for promoting empathy,
recognition of others’ emotional states, and generally
creating a bond between people (Chartrand & Bargh,
1999; Carr, Iacoboni, Dubeau, Maziotta, & Lenzi, 2003).
Our previous work has shown that people spontaneously
mimic an anthropomorphic robot, demonstrating that
mimicry occurs even when dealing with an automaton,
suggesting automaticity of basic mimicry (Hofree,
Ruvolo, Bartlett, & Winkielman, in submission). Of
course, human emotional expressivity is not only
grounded in mimicry reactions to others in our
environment. Our emotional reactions to others’
expressions also depend on the current context. For
example, when playing bridge, you may respond
positively to your partner’s smile, since this is a sign that
you are both winning. Yet, you may respond with a frown
when your opponent is smiling, since this smile signals a
loss for you. There is some debate on how automatic
mimicry processes may interact with other emotive
processes. Some evidence suggests that mimicry, as an
automatic process, can interfere if our goal is not to mimic
(Cook, Bird, Lünser, Huck, & Heyes, 2012), or at least

slow down non-mimicking reactions (Brass, Bekkering, &
Prinz, 2011). However, certain studies suggest that
response to even unconscious cues can be modulated by
the current context (Tamir, Robinson, Clore, Martin, &
Whitaker, 2001). The current research shows that robotic
emotional expressivity can elicit human emotional
reactions in more complex ways than simple mimicry.
Participants were asked to play a game with or against an
android. On half of the trials, the android displayed
truthful emotional reactions to his own outcome from the
current game using his faces. On the other half the
outcome of the game was displayed in writing on the
computer terminal. Using electromyography (EMG) to
measure people’s facial reactions, we found that people’s
expressions are solely a function of participants’ own
outcome from the game. That is, participants smile when
they win and frown when they lose. Critically, this occurs
regardless of whether the information about win or loss is
communicated by the android’s smile or by his frown.
Furthermore, the android’s expressions elicited greater
facial reactions in participants, as compared to their
reactions in response to the outcome being displayed on
the computer screen. These findings demonstrate that
people’s facial responses to androids are open to
contextual influences, and do not simply reflect mimicry.
Overall, the results suggest that simple facial expressions
can provide an important and subtle means of
communicating emotional information and promoting
emotional reactions beyond mimicry in human robot
interactions.
D-53
RESISTANCE
AND
REJECTION:
NEURAL
MECHANISMS OF SOCIAL EXCLUSION IN
ADOLESCENCE Anne Hill, University of Oregon; Shannon
Peake, University of Oregon; Lauren Kahn, University of
Oregon; Beth Stormshak, Unversity of Oregon; Thomas
Dishion, Arizona State University; Jennifer Pfeifer, University
of Oregon - Adolescence is a formative period of social
development in which individuals become especially
sensitive to social cues such as exclusion and rejection.
Previous research examining neural responses to social
exclusion in early adolescence (Masten et al., 2009) found
a network of regions associated with feelings of distress
as a result of exclusion, including heightened activity in
the insula and lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC), and
diminished activity in ventral striatum (VS) and medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC). In this study, a novel group of
18 participants in middle adolescence (ages 13.8-16.6)
experienced an episode social exclusion while undergoing
fMRI. Participants played two rounds of ‘cyberball,’ a
paradigm that leads participants to believe they are being
excluded from a ball-tossing game by two peers.
Immediately following the exclusion, participants
reported feelings of exclusion and distress associated with
rejection using the Need Threat Scale (NTS). Replicating
previous research in early adolescents, greater feelings of
distress during exclusion related to diminished neural
activity in the VS, mPFC, and lPFC, as well as heightened
responses in insula and (unique to this study)
hypothalamus. Furthermore, self-reported resistance to
peer influence (RPI) was associated with activation in the

dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), a region thus far
found primarily in the adult literature to relate to social
rejection (Eisenberger and Lieberman, 2004). In the adult
literature, activation in the dACC is thought to reflect
visceral experience of social pain. In the current study,
higher reports of distress after exclusion (on the NTS)
were unrelated to activity in the dACC. However, higher
self-reported RPI was associated with lower self-reported
threat to participants’ sense of belonging (a subscale of
the NTS) as a consequence of social exclusion. In
addition, participants who showed increased activity in
the dACC during exclusion reported a lower sense of
belonging after rejection. Together, these results may
suggest that resistance to peer influence may act like a
buffer to social pain, or that adolescents who experience
less pain as a result of social exclusion are less susceptible
to peer pressure.
D-54
TRUST ALL, LOVE A FEW: NEURAL CORRELATES
OF SOCIAL INTERACTIONS WITH PEERS Berna
Güroƒülu, Leiden University, Leiden Institute for Brain and
Cognition; Eduard Klapwijk, Leiden Institute for Brain and
Cognition, Leiden University Medical Center; Geert-Jan Will,
Leiden University, Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition When people interact with other people they have all
sorts of expectations about others\' intentions guiding
their social decisions in everyday life. Previously gained
information about the interaction partner or previous
encounters with the particular person has been shown to
influence social behavior in interactions. For example,
people act in more cooperative ways in interactions with
those who they believe are morally good (Delgado et al.,
2005) and with those who act in prosocial ways (van den
Bos et al., 2011). However, little is known how behavior
and cognition in social encounters is shaped by actual
real-life relationships with personally familiar others. Peer
relationships form one of the most significant social
context across development; thus, in this study we aimed
to investigate the neural correlates of trust related
interactions with peers. In the current fMRI study
participants had online interactions with personally
familiar peers from their classrooms. Participants from
vocational universities (N=16, mean age = 20.6 years)
were first contacted in their classrooms where they filled
out sociometric questionnaires indicating liked and
disliked classmates. During the scanning session, they
played a repeated Trust Game as the first player with
three interaction partners: a friend (i.e., a liked classmate),
an antagonist (i.e., a disliked classmate), and an
anonymous peer (i.e., the confederate they met before the
experiment). In each trial participants made a decision to
either divide the stake of 10 coins equally between them
and the interaction partner (‘no-trust’ option), or to ‘trust’
the other by giving him/her all the stake to divide, which
also tripled the stake to 30 coins. Importantly, the
interaction partner made a simultaneous decision to
either ‘defect’ by keep all coins for him/herself or to
‘reciprocate’ by sharing the 30 coins equally. After the
participant made a decision, he/she could see the
decision of the interaction partner. Although amounts of
trust displayed by the participants towards the three

different interaction partners were similar on average,
there were differences in mentalizing and reward-related
brain regions activated during the interactions.
Preliminary findings showed higher insula activation
during no-trust choices and higher anterior medial
prefrontal cortex activation during trust choices. Two
brain
regions
important
for
mentalizing,
the
temporoparietal junction (TPJ) and the dorsal medial
prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), were more active during
interactions with friends than during interactions with
antagonists. Furthermore, brain regions involved in
mentalizing (e.g., TPJ) and reward related learning (e.g.
lateral orbitofrontal cortex and caudate) were
differentially involved in received feedback, showing
highest activation during defect feedback following notrust choices. Taken together, the findings provide insight
into the neural basis of feedback processing in social
interactions and highlight the moderating role of real-life
relationships with interaction partners in social cognition.
D-55
BRAIN-BEHAVIOR
CORRELATIONS
IN
THE
CONTEXT OF A PARENT-CHILD MINDFULNESSBASED INTERVENTION Lisa M. May, Josh Felver-Grant,
Jessica M. Tipsord, Elliot T. Berkman; University of Oregon
Mindfulness meditation practices have been linked to a
myriad of positive outcomes related to both physical
health (e.g., pain relief, improved immune function,
reductions in blood pressure and cortisol levels) and
mental health (e.g., improvements in insomnia, anxiety,
depression, addiction, and eating disorders, as well as
reduced emotional reactivity). However, despite the fact
that many of those health-related outcomes have been
linked to the quality of an individual’s social network,
very few studies have examined the effects of
mindfulness on social functioning. Here, we seek to test
whether mindfulness meditation benefits one key social
skill that has been associated with physical health in both
animals and humans: parenting behavior. Specifically, the
aim of the present study was to examine the effects of a
mindfulness
based
stress
reduction
program
administered to parents and pre-teen children together on
parents’ outcomes. We hypothesized that the parent’s
changes in mindfulness would track the child’s changes,
and that this association would be reflected in the neural
activity of the parent. To test this hypothesis, 18 parents (2
male), ages 29 - 57 enrolled in an eight week Mindfulness
Based Stress Reduction Program along with their preteen
children. The MBSR group met once a week for 90
minutes and emphasized the cultivation of moment to
moment non-judgmental awareness of mental states and
processes through mindfulness meditation and yoga.
Parents performed a mindfulness task while their brain
activity was recorded using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) before the 8 week intervention
and then again after completion of the course.
Additionally, survey data and total minutes of home
mindfulness practice were recorded for parents and
children. Results indicated that increases (from before to
after the course) in parents’ brain activity in the left insula
during mindfulness correlated with improvements in
their child’s score on a commonly used family

relationship scale. This result suggests that parent and
child responses to a mindfulness intervention are related
in a meaningful way. There may be specific value to
involving multiple family members in mindfulness
training together, possibly taking advantage of the
interconnected nature of the parent-child relationship to
support additional improvements in patient health and
psychiatric outcomes.
D-56
DEVELOPMENT OF THE FRONTAL LOBE AND ITS
RELATIONSHIP TO SELF-REGULATORY ABILITIES
IN ADOLESCENTS Nandita Vijayakumar, Sarah Whittle,
Murat Yucel, Nicholas B. Allen; University of Melbourne Adolescence is a period of significant brain maturational
changes in regions associated with self-regulation. While
normative patterns of cortical thinning are postulated to
underlie adaptive socioemotional outcomes, aberrations
of this process are thought to result in poorer selfregulatory abilities and associated psychopathology
(Nelson et al., 2005; Marsh et al., 2008, Sowell et al., 2004).
This study characterizes the development of two regions
known to underlie regulatory processes, the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) and the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC), during adolescence. The study also
examines the relationship between cortical development
of these regions with two aspects of self-regulation: i.
effortful control, a temperamental measure of selfregulation, and ii. adaptive emotion regulation strategies.
Participants were recruited from Australian primary
schools (N = 95, 48% male) and examined longitudinally,
during early (T1: mean age = 12.66), middle (T2: mean age
= 16.43) and late adolescence (T3: mean age = 18.76).
Structural MRI scans were obtained at T1 and T2, and
cortical thickness was measured using FreeSurfer (Fischl
et al., 1999). Effortful control (EC) was also measured at
T1 and T2 using the Early Adolescent Temperament
Questionnaire-Revised, and adaptive emotion regulation
strategies were measured at T3 using the Emotional
Regulation Questionnaire (ERQ). Linear mixed models
were employed to analyze brain development between T1
and T2, including gender and hemisphere effects.
Annualized percentage change in cortical thickness was
calculated for each region and used in subsequent mixed
models, along with gender, to investigate the relationship
between self-regulation and brain development. Results
revealed that the ACC and DLPFC exhibited significant
reductions in cortical thickness between early and midadolescence across both hemispheres. EC was
significantly related to left ACC and left DLPFC
development, with greater EC associated with increased
cortical thinning in both these regions. Analysis of ERQ at
T3 identified significant interaction effects between
gender and brain development. Post-hoc analysis
conducted separately for each sex indicated that
reductions in cortical thickness of the left and right
DLPFC was associated with more adaptive emotion
regulation strategies in females (greater cognitive
reappraisal and lower emotion suppression), while
increased thickness of the right ACC and right DLFPC
was more adaptive in males (lower emotion suppression).
The current findings provide support for cortical thinning

of the ACC and DLPFC between early and middle
adolescence. Furthermore, those with higher effortful
control exhibit greater cortical thinning of these frontal
regulatory regions. The findings also highlight genderspecific relationships between cortical maturation and
adaptive emotion regulation abilities during late
adolescence. While cortical thinning between early and
mid-adolescence appears to benefit females’ emotion
regulation during later adolescence, the inverse
relationship is found in males.
D-57
NEURAL BASIS OF SIMULATION AND ITS
RELATIONSHIP TO SOCIAL FUNCTIONING IN
YOUNG ADULTS AT RISK FOR PSYCHOSIS Sarah
Hope Lincoln; Laura M. Tully; David Dodell-Feder; Christine I
Hooker; Harvard University - Understanding the
development of social dysfunction, its neural basis and
behavioral presentation, and its relationship with the
onset of active psychosis is a target for research in
psychosis-spectrum disorders. One possible explanation
for deficits in social functioning could be explained by
impairment in the neural mechanisms of the
psychological process of simulation. Simulation is a
psychological process requiring the individual, as the
observer, to imagine how she or he might feel or behave
in the same situation as another individual; it may be a
strategic social cognitive process recruited for tasks such
as emotion recognition, empathy, or theory of mind. The
current study includes both observation of a stimulus and
imagination of the stimulus, to directly test whether
participants use a network of regions involved in imaging
others’ experiences in order to understand an experience.
A fundamental strength of this current study is the use of
a real-world daily sampling measure of individuals’ social
interactions and their experience of these interactions, in
order to test the hypothesis that the degree of simulation
may relate to social functioning.
The current study
addresses gaps in the simulation literature by using a task
designed to test the strength of an internally generated
representation of a sensation in order to test the
hypothesis regarding simulation in both healthy and
clinical compromised populations. Going a step further,
this study aims to relate the neural basis of simulation to
its role in social functioning, a relationship that, to our
knowledge, has not yet been explored. 40 volunteers, 21
high risk for psychosis individuals (HR) and 19 healthy
controls (HC), ranging in age from 15-35, participated in
this study. The task designed specifically for this study
was effective in demonstrating the neural activity during
the process of simulation. As individuals imagined what
an experience would be like for them we saw activation in
simulation related regions (e.g. somatosensory cortex and
related areas) of the brain. When looking at differences
between the two groups, healthy young adults and young
adults at clinical risk for psychosis, we found group
differences in brain activity in the somatosensory cortex
and the calcarine sulcus during the simulation condition,
with the HC group showing greater activity in these
regions than the HR group.
Activation in the
somatosensory cortex was seen in each group separately
and was related to social support, social approach,

positive social experiences, empathic concern, and
perspective taking. This study suggests that healthy
people use the process of simulation when they imagine
themselves having the same experience as someone else,
and this process is impaired in individuals at risk for
schizophrenia. Moreover the process of simulation is
related to day-to-day social functioning.
D-58
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE COGNITIVE
AND AFFECTIVE COMPONENTS INVOLVED IN
HUMOR COMPREHENSION AND APPRECIATION
Midori Shibata, Hokkaido University, Keio University; Yuri
Terasawa, Keio University, National Institute of Mental
Health, Japan Society for the Promotion of Science; Satoshi
Umeda, Keio University - The perception of humor evokes a
pleasant emotional response in addition to causing
laughter or changes in the brain and body via the
autonomic and endocrine systems (Panksepp, 1993).
Recent neuroimaging studies using a verbal joke have
examined the neural substrates involved in humor
comprehension (Bekinschtein et al., 2011; Chan et al.,
2012; Goel and Dolan, 2001, 2007).These findings have
begun to map the cortical regions involved in the
cognitive processes of humor comprehension and the
subcortical limbic areas underlying the emotional
response of humor. However, the relationship between
the cognitive and affective components remains unclear.
In this study, we used the same target sentences for two
conditions (the humor and literal sentence conditions) to
identify the specific activation of humor comprehension.
The first two sentences and the target sentence (punch
line) were identical, while the third sentence differed
between conditions. The important difference between the
humor and literal sentence conditions was that the punch
line (target sentence) in the humor sentence condition
induced a perception of funniness, while the use of the
same sentence in the literal sentence condition did not.
The results indicate that despite using the same sentences,
only the punch line in the humor sentence condition
induced a perception of funniness and resulted in greater
activation in the fronto-temporal region and the
mesolimbic reward region. We found that the frontotemporal regions are involved in processing the semantic
aspects of humor comprehension. Further, the punch line
in the humor sentence condition showed greater
activation in a network of subcortical regions, including
the hippocampus, amygdala, ventral striatum, and
midbrain, which have been implicated in experiencing
positive rewards. In addition, functional connectivity
analyses revealed that the activity of the ventromedial
prefrontal, inferior frontal (BA 47; pars orbitalis), and
middle temporal cortex functionally interacted with that
of the mesolimbic reward region. These results suggest
that the network including the ventromedial prefrontal,
inferior frontal (BA 47; pars orbitalis), middle temporal
cortex and mesolimbic region plays a critical role in the
interaction between the cognitive and affective
components involved in humor comprehension and
appreciation.

D-59
THE DURABILITY OF COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL
APPLIED TO AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES
Alisha C. Holland, New York University; Bruce Dore,
Columbia University; Lila Davachi, New York University;
Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia University - Cognitive
reappraisal is an effective strategy for reducing negative
affect when employed during emotional autobiographical
memory (AM) recall (Holland & Kensinger, 2013).
However, little is known about whether regulation effects
are sustained when reappraised memories are recalled in
the future or about the factors that may contribute to this
durability. One potential factor is the nature of the
practice that individuals have with reappraising their
memories. For example, repeated practices that are
distributed over time may allow for stronger
consolidation of reappraised events than repeated
practices that occur with little rest. A second factor is the
amount of time that individuals spend practicing each
reappraisal. We addressed both variables by instructing
participants: (1) to reappraise negative AMs twice, with
either a 24-hour or 10-minute space between reappraisals
(within-subjects factor) and (2) to reappraise at their own
pace or with a fixed amount of time (between-subjects
factor).
One week following a baseline memory
generation session, 23 participants received instructions
for reinterpreting negative AMs (Decrease Condition) and
for recalling AMs as they normally would (Remember
Condition).
They viewed Decrease and Remember
instructions with self-generated titles for a subset of their
AMs. Following either a fixed (14 sec) or self-paced (M =
24.75 sec; SD = 11.37 sec) period, participants rated how
much negative affect they experienced during recall.
Twenty-four hours later, they completed the identical task
with a different subset of memories. When affect ratings
from both days were submitted to 2 (Timing: Self-Paced,
Fixed) X 2 (Condition: Decrease, Remember) mixed
ANOVAs, only main effects of condition were significant,
confirming that memories in the Decrease (vs. Remember)
condition were rated as less negative (ps < .001, ∆ûp2s >
.57).
After a 10-minute delay, participants again
Decreased or Remembered and re-rated the events from
the prior day (i.e., Distributed Practice) and from that day
(i.e., Massed Practice). Affect ratings were submitted to a
2 (Timing) X 2 (Condition) X 2 (Practice: Distributed,
Massed) mixed ANOVA. A main effect of condition
confirmed that individuals successfully reappraised their
affect for the Decrease condition (p < .001, ∆ûp2 = .61). A
trending Condition X Timing interaction revealed a
greater difference between the Decrease and Remember
instructions on the self-paced task, p = .07, ∆ûp2 = .12.
Following another 10-minute delay, participants re-rated
their negative affect for each memory to test the durability
of their reappraisals. A 2 (Timing) X 2 (Condition) X 2
(Practice) mixed ANOVA revealed a main effect of
Condition, with lower ratings for memories that had
previously been reappraised (p < .001, ∆ûp2 = .59). A
trending 3-way interaction was evident, such that
memories with distributed reappraisal practice showed
greater durability when regulated at a self-paced rate,
whereas memories with massed practice showed greater
durability when regulation time was fixed (p = .09, ∆ûp2

= .14).
Taken together, these results suggest that (1)
negative AM reappraisal is durable over a short delay and
(2) both the amount of time spent practicing reappraisals
and the spacing between those practices may influence
this durability.
D-60
FEELING
THINNER:
HEALTHY
PEOPLE
UNDERESTIMATE THEIR OWN BODY Stefania
Cannella, Alessia Folegatti, Massimiliano Zampini, Francesco
Pavani; University of Trento - How accurate are we in
perceiving body size? The methods commonly used to
investigate perception of body size rely on asking
participants directly about their perceived body size, to
match their body from a range of silhouettes, or to adjust
images to match their perceived body size. In the present
study, the methods of constant stimuli has been adopted
as a less subjective approach to body size estimation.
Twenty participants (10 females and 10 males) judged the
size of their own body or of the body of a stranger, in a
forced-choice task on body stimuli of different size.
Images of the Self with different degrees of size
distortions (trunk and waists increased or decreased by
¬±50%, ¬±10.7%, ¬±7.1%, ¬±3.6%) were created from a
whole body picture of the participant, wearing tight black
cloths. Similarly, images of the Other with different size
distortions (again trunk and waists increased or decreased
by ¬±50%, ¬±10.7%, ¬±7.1%, ¬±3.6%) were created from a
picture of an unknown person of the same gender as the
participant. Participants built an internal representation of
the Other by observing three movies that showed her/his
interactions with the environment. Across blocks,
participants judged whether the presented body (image of
the self, or image of the other) was fatter or thinner than
their own body or than the body of the stranger.. For each
participants we fitted a logistic function, and we extracted
the PSE (point of subjective equality) and JND ( justnoticeable difference). ANCOVA on PSE with judgment
(self or other), congruency between the judgment and the
body presented (congruent or incongruent) and gender
(male or female) as independent variables, and Body
Mass Index (BMI) as covariate, revealed a significant main
effect of Judgment, caused by negative PSE when judging
the size of own body but positive PSE when judging the
size of the actor body. Furthermore, when judging
incongruent bodies (i.e., judging Self while seeing Other)
this effect was modulated by BMI. Similar analyses on
JND did not reveal any significant effect. These findings
reveal a striking underestimation of the own body in
healthy people. Unlike previous works (Mohr et al., 2007)
we found no difference between males and females. At
least two explanations may account for these results. First,
these findings may reveal a self-serving body-image bias
in the healthy people, which leads to underestimation of
own (but not others) body size. Alternatively, they may
originate from the body distortion in the somatosensory
homunculus, because underestimation was observed for a
body part (trunk and waists) that are under-represented
in this neural body representation.

D-61
STRONGER THAN GENETICS? ANALYSES OF
MURINE MODELS PROVIDES EVIDENCE THAT
LIFESTYLE
ENRICHMENT
CAN
OVERCOME
GENETIC PREDISPOSITION FOR AGE-RELATED
COGNITIVE DECLINE Vanessa M. Doulames, Sangmook
Lee, Thomas B. Shea; University Massachusetts Lowell Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) manifests from a complex
etiology that encompasses multiple risk factors. These
include genetic, dietary, environmental and social
deficiencies. No single category is sufficient to account
for the total prevalence of AD, suggesting that the
combinatorial impact of two or more risk factors is
required for clinical manifestation of AD. The relative
impact of these various factors remains elusive due to
their inherent diversity among community-dwelling
individuals.
However, the reductionist approach
afforded by analyses of genetically-engineered murine
models maintained under controlled conditions can
provide critical insight towards the relative impact of
individual risk factors, as well as various combinations of
two or more factors. Prior studies from our laboratory
and others demonstrate that diets deficient in antioxidant
vitamins impair cognitive performance in murine models,
while, conversely, diets rich in antioxidants maintain or
improve cognitive performance in mouse models (e.g.,
mice homozygously lacking apolipoprotein E) prone to
age-related oxidative stress.
Herein, normal mice were
provided with “complete” or “deficient” diets (the latter
lacking in folate and vitamin E and supplemented with
iron as a pro-oxidant). Mice were housed in either a
standard cage, or an “enriched” cage [1.5x larger,
outfitted with 3 objects of interest (e.g., exercise wheel,
tubes, exploratory cubes), with one object changed
weekly] that promote exploration and mental stimulation.
Cohorts of mice were housed “socially” (2-3 per cage) or
individually (“isolated”). Prior to, and 4 weeks after
housing under the above conditions, mice were subjected
to standard Y maze analyses and Novel Object
Recognition (NOR; in which they were housed in an
arena with a familiar and novel object, and the amount of
time which they explored each object was quantified).
Following these analyses, mice were sacrificed and lipid
and protein oxidation was quantified in brain tissue.
Mice maintained in the enriched environment
outperformed those in the standard environment,
regardless of diet. Mice housed socially outperformed
those housed individually regardless of environmental
conditions. Analyses of brain tissue revealed that the
enriched environment reduced dietary-induced oxidative
stress. These results, coupled with prior studies, suggest
that environmental enrichment has a stronger impact on
cognitive performance than nutrition or social interaction.
Since nutritional supplementation has been shown to
compensate for critical genetic risk factors in murine
models, extrapolation of these findings to humans suggest
that environmental enrichment and social interaction
exert powerful influences on age-related cognitive decline
that may even overcome genetic risk factors.
These
findings highlight the importance of environmental and
social stimulation during aging and AD.

D-62
ADAPTIVE OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING; THE
RELIABILITY
AND
AMOUNT
OF
SOCIAL
INFORMATION
EFFECT
INSTRUMENTAL
LEARNING TO AVOID PUNISHMENT Ida Selbing,
Björn Lindström, Armita Golkar, Andreas Olsson; Karolinska
Institutet - Social learning through observing others’
actions can be safe and efficient because it does not incur
the potential costs of individual trial and error.
Nonetheless, information gained through observation
might be less reliable than information gained through
direct experience thus making social learning potentially
risky. When observing the choice behavior of another
individual, information about both the other’s choices and
the outcomes of these choices is normally available.
However, it is unclear how humans use these sources of
information to adaptively guide their own choice
behavior when the information from the observed other is
more or less reliable. To address this, we used a
probabilistic two-choice task where subjects attempted to
minimize the amount of punishment(electric shocks) by
learning to select the stimulus less likely to predict a
shock. Apart from being able to use direct learning
subjects also observed the choices of another individual
that also learned the task. We used a design similarly to
the one previously used by Burke et al (2009) where the
task was performed under three levels of available
observational information; (1) no information, (2) choices
only, (3) both choices and choice outcomes. In order to
vary how reliable the observational information was, the
observed other made choices that were either rational
(near optimal) or irrational (random). The results showed
that when observing a rational other, information about
choices only resulted in similar performance as observing
both choices and their outcomes, whereas when observing
an irrational other, information about choices only led to
performance on par with individual learning (no
information condition). Analyses using reinforcement
learning (RL) modeling showed that information from
both observed choice and observed choice outcome were
discounted when the behavior of the observed other was
irrational. This is noteworthy because the observed
outcomes of these choices could still be used to optimize
own choice behavior. The RL model that best explained
behavioral data included a reliability-parameter, which
reflected the expected performance of the observed other,
making observational information (both choice and choice
outcome) less influential on own choice when gained
from another that performs poorly. The RL model
included the computation of (i) an action prediction error,
defined as the difference between observed and predicted
choice of the other, and (ii) an observational prediction
error, defined as the difference between expected and
observed outcome following the other’s choice. These
types of prediction errors have both previously been
linked to separate neural correlates during observational
learning; the action prediction error with the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex and the observational prediction error
with the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Taken together,
the results show that humans estimate the reliability of
social information to adapt their individual learning
although not necessarily in an optimal manner.

D-63 *SANS Poster Award Winner
UNITED
WE
STAND:
INTEGRATING
PERSONALITY,
DECISION
THEORY
AND
NEUROSCIENCE
TO
INVESTIGATE
CHOICE
MECHANISMS IN A TIME DISCOUNTING TASK
Claudia Civai, Colin G. DeYoung, Daniel R. Hawes, Aldo
Rustichini; University of Minnesota - Using a large sample
of participants, we investigate the phenomenon of time
discounting, testing how neural activation at the moment
of perception of the options correlates with individual
differences. As part of a study in progress, the current
sample of 80 subjects performed a delay discounting task
inside an MRI 3T scanner. The choice was between a
lower early (e), not always immediate, payment and a
higher late (l) payment. The paradigm used allows to
distinguish the moment of the perception of e, the
moment of the perception of l and the subsequent
moment of the choice. Personality traits and intelligence
(IQ) were assessed using, respectively, the Big Five
Aspect Scale (DeYoung et al, 2007) and a short form of the
WAIS-IV. Behavioral data were modeled using the
hyperbolic function, where the subjective value (SV) of
the reward depends on the objective amount, the delay
and an additional parameter k, that represents the rate at
which the reward is discounted. Log k was used as the
measure of discounting: the higher the k, the higher the
discount. Two linear regressions showed that: a) the
difference in SV between e and l predicts log k,
irrespective of whether e is immediate or not, and b) IQ is
the only individual trait that predicts, with a negative
sign, log k, meaning that greater intelligence is associated
with less impatience (Burks et al, 2009). Two models
were used to predict neural activation, and both focused
on the moment of the perception of the option. The
regressors in the first model accounted for 1)
early_immediate (e_i) options, 2) immediate and nonimmediate early options (e) and 3) SV, obtained by
weighting all the options, both e and l, for their SV (Kable
& Glimcher, 2007). Results showed that the activation in
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), anterior and middle
cingulate, ventral striatum and lateral prefrontal cortex
(LPFC) increased with the increase of SV; however,
although no effect of immediacy was found on behavior, a
more ventral area of MPFC and posterior cingulate cortex
were specifically activated by e_i. The regressors of the
second model accounted for 1) e_i, 2) early nonimmediate (e_ni) and 3) l options, all weighted for their
SV. The contrast e_i vs l showed, again, a specificity for
immediacy in the orbitomedial frontal cortex (OMFC);
also, the activation of this area for e_i positively correlated
with Extraversion (E), meaning that this trait, although
not influencing the choice, increases the sensitivity of
OMFC to immediate rewards. Moreover, the opposite
contrast l vs e_i showed an increase in LPFC activation
that correlated negatively with IQ; specifically, the higher
the IQ, the lower the activation in LPFC for l, suggesting
that more intelligent subjects need less recruitment of
control areas to elaborate late options.
Our results
suggest that the combination of two possible mechanisms,
one that is more sensitive to immediate rewards and the
other based on self-control areas, determines the choice;
moreover, individual differences, such as E and IQ,

predict both mechanisms differently.
D-64
LINKING WORDS TO OBJECTS: DOES IT MATTER
HOW MUCH YOU LIKE THE SPEAKER? Hannah De
Mulder, Iris Mulders, Marijn Struiksma, Jos van Berkum; UiL
OTS, Utrecht University - Reference resolution, the ability
to work out what speakers are referring to when they say
things like “this experiment”, or “that candle”, is
fundamental for communication. One powerful heuristic
in this process is to take the speaker’s perspective in
determining the intended referent. For example, when a
speaker wishes to draw the listener’s attention to one
specific object out of several objects, listeners should
expect the speaker to only refer to objects that they both
can see (i.e. that are shared). Interestingly, listeners are
not always particularly good at using the speaker’s
perspective to determine reference, sometimes getting
distracted by things that only they can see (Keysar et al.,
2000). For instance, when people hear a speaker refer to
‘the small candle’ in a situation in which the speaker sees
a big and a small candle while the listener sees those two
plus an even smaller candle (that is hidden from the
speaker’s view), listeners are often distracted by the latter,
even though they know it cannot have been the candle
intended by the speaker. In the current study, we ask
whether such a perspective-taking failure depends on
whether listeners like the speaker or not, and,
furthermore, whether any such effects vary with their
prenatal testosterone level, and/or self-reported tendency
to “take other people’s perspective”, as both factors have
been shown to influence behaviour in social interactions.
56 female subjects participated in an eye-tracking study
that required them to link particular objects to a sentence
uttered by either a friendly or an unfriendly speaker.
Crucially, the subjects knew that certain objects were only
visible to them and that the speaker could thus never refer
to those objects. On target trials, subjects had to actively
ignore an object that seemed to fit the utterance, but was
hidden from the speaker’s view. To determine the role of
speaker (dis)like in this process, subjects first played a
game in which they could win or lose desirable items
depending on the speaker’s decisions. Prenatal
testosterone was determined by calculating the ratio of
the right hand index and ring finger; perspective-taking
scores were taken from the Interpersonal Reactivity Index
self-report scale. As in previous studies, subjects were
distracted by hidden objects that seemed to fit the
speaker’s utterance. Critically, though, the level of
distraction depended on subjects’ like or dislike of the
speaker, in combination with their self-reported tendency
to take another’s perspective and their prenatal
testosterone exposure. Specifically, when listening to the
unfriendly speaker, subjects who reported higher
perspective-taking tendencies were especially distracted
by the hidden object, whereas listening to a friendly
speaker showed reduced distraction by this object.
Additionally, subjects with lower prenatal testosterone
exposure experienced significant distraction by the
hidden object when listening to the friendly speaker.
Surprisingly, these results thus suggest that under certain

conditions, speaker (dis)like actually influences listeners’
ability to engage in a very basic aspect of human language
processing: identifying what a particular word actually
refers to even when the communication is about a simple,
neutral visual scene.
	  

D-65
IMPULSIVITY AND REAL-LIFE RISK TAKING ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH DECREASED TENDENCY TO
SHOW STANDARD FRAMING EFFECTS AND
INCREASED REWARD PROCESSING FOR RISKY
CHOICES IN THE GAIN FRAME Christina F. Chick,
Valerie F. Reyna, Oren N. Jaspan, Jeremy D. Ojalehto; Cornell
University - Framing effects illustrate inconsistency in
decision making and are a standard example of human
irrationality. When choosing between two options of
equal expected value, people tend to prefer the sure
option when options are described as gains, but the risky
option when options are described as losses. In this study,
32 participants completed a risky choice framing task in
an fMRI scanner. Framing problems were presented as
gains or losses, and participants chose either a sure or a
risky option (e.g. in the gain frame, 600 lives at stake and
choice between 200 saved for sure or 1/3 chance 600
saved and 2/3 chance no one saved). Individual
differences in impulsive sensation seeking and in real-life
risk taking were measured using the Impulsivity subscale
of the Sensation Seeking Scale (Zuckerman-Kuhlman,
Joire & Kraft, 1993) and the Adolescent Risk
Questionnaire (ARQ, which has been validated for use
with adults; Gullone, Moore, Moss & Boyd, 2000),
respectively. Participants high in impulsive sensation
seeking were less likely to show the standard framing
effect, and they showed increased activation in the left
dorsal striatum (putamen and caudate) as well as the
right inferior frontal gyrus when choosing risky options
in the gain frame. Participants who took more risks in real
life were also less likely to show the standard framing
effect, and they showed increased activation in bilateral
insula, bilateral dorsal striatum (putamen and caudate),
and left orbitofrontal cortex when choosing risky options
in the gain frame. These results upend common
assumptions about the mechanisms of framing effects,
suggesting that framing is not driven by impulsivity, lack
of impulse control, or hyper-responsiveness to reward.
Rather, these qualities lead to reverse framing, a
preference for the risky option in the gain frame (for
which the magnitude of potential gains is higher, since
the options are constrained to be equal in expected value)
and the sure option in the loss frame (for which the
magnitude of potential losses is smaller). These findings
are consistent with the mechanism of reverse framing
proposed by Reyna, Estrada, DeMarinis et al. (2011) and
question the interpretation of framing effects as the
hallmark of irrationality, since individuals who are less
rational in real life show a decreased propensity for
standard framing effects.

D-66
CEREBELLAR
CONTRIBUTIONS
TO
THE
DIMENSION OF DOMINANCE IN AFFECTIVE
PROCESSING Alyson Negreira, David Gansler, Matthew
Jerram; Suffolk University - Emotion is a dimensional
construct, comprised of valence, arousal, and dominance.
Neuroimaging studies of emotion have primarily studied
the neural correlates of valence and arousal, leaving
dominance neuroanatomically unexplored. As a result,
the role of the cerebellum in the perception and
experience of dominance has not been studied to date. In
the current emotion regulation study, sixteen male
participants viewed images from the International
Affective Picture System (IAPS) while undergoing
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Four
conditions were created using IAPS normative ratings: (1)
passive viewing of negative valence, negative dominance,
(2) passive viewing of neutral valence, neutral dominance,
(3) top down processing of neutral valence, neutral
dominance where the participant was instructed to make
the image more negative, and (4) top down processing of
neutral valence, neutral dominance where the participant
was instructed to make the image more dominant.
Functional and structural MRI data were analyzed using
the standard processing stream of the Martinos Center for
Biomedical
Imaging
(http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu). When engaging in
top down processes to make the image more negative,
relative to more dominant, reduced activity was observed
in the cerebellum (MNI coordinates: 31, -73, -23). Overlap
analyses suggest that this cerebellar region is implicated
in the cerebellar representation of the default mode
network (Buckner et al., 2011).
Studies of affective
processing have focused on the dimensions of valence
and arousal, and have restricted analyses to cortical and
sub-cortical brain regions. Further research is needed to
elucidate the cerebellar contributions in affective
processes and specifically to that of the dimension of
dominance in affective processing.
D-67
THE ROLE OF MOOD CONGRUENCY IN IMPLICIT
PROCESSING
OF
EMOTIONAL
FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS: AN ERP STUDY Zoe Kleiman-Tapley,
Erik Arnold, Colin Quirk, Jane Couperus; Hampshire College Affective neuroscience research has found that
congruency between a participant’s current emotional
state and the emotional valence of presented visual
stimuli affects the processing of faces and facelike objects.
Studies of inattentional blindness have found that
participants more often notice unexpected face or facelike
stimuli when the expression of the unexpected face is
congruent with the participant’s current emotional state
(Becker & Leinenger, 2011). Additionally, behavioral
studies show that a mood manipulation exercise can yield
a faster and more accurate discrimination of mood
congruent faces vs. mood incongruent faces (Hietanen &
Astikainen, 2012). ERP research has shown that the facesensitive N170 component is modulated by emotional
facial expressions when the processing of a face is a nonexplicit part of the task (Blau, Maurer, Tottenham, &
McCandliss, 2007), which mimics real-world instances of

emotion recognition. The current study used a moodmanipulation writing exercise to induce happy or sad
emotional states in 14 participants. Post- mood
manipulation, all subjects were shown a series of
photographs of happy, sad, and neutral faces, as well as
images of circles and squares, and were asked to respond
when they saw a geometric shape rather than a face. The
N170 component showed a significantly larger amplitude
after presentation of mood incongruent faces in both
happiness induction (p=.001) and sadness induction
(p=.003) conditions. These results are consistent with
research on the cross-race effect and inversion that have
shown an augmented N170 in response to unfamiliar or
out-group faces (Freeman, Ambady, & Holcomb, 2010;
Jacques & Rossion, 2007), indicating a cognitive in-group
bias toward mood congruent faces, which in this study
was present regardless of race. This study could have
significant real-world implications for the facilitation of
empathetic
response,
as
well
as
providing
electrophysiological evidence of neurological processes
potentially correlated with affective empathy.

Poster Session H
Saturday, April 13, 2:45-4:15pm
H-01
AFFECT OF ENVIRONMENTAL VALUATION Nik
Sawe, Brian Knutson; Stanford University - Environmental
economists have often employed contingent valuation as
a method of deriving people's willingness-to-pay (WTP)
for intrinsic, nonmarket services of environmental
resources, most famously to establish damages from the
Exxon Valdez oil spill. Affective response plays a large
role in generating this WTP, at times confounding
contingent valuation measures by creating "protest
zeroes" due to outrage over environmentally destructive
land uses. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(FMRI) and a charitable giving WTP task, we examined
neural activation during environmental valuation in order
to establish potential neural correlates of the decision
process. This study was performed both in FMRI (n=14)
and behaviorally (n=30) on healthy volunteers using a GE
3.0 T scanner (32 channel head coil, echoplanar pulse
sequence, voxel size = 2.9 mm cubic, TR = 2000 msec). In
72 incentive-compatible trials, subjects were shown park
land under threat of various new developmental land
uses, and asked if they would donate from their endowed
$24 to avert the use. From survey data (n=66), parks were
classified as iconic (e.g., archetypal) or non-iconic, and
proposed uses as destructive or conservative. Subjects
displayed increased activity in the nucleus accumbens, a
region recruited in incentive processing, with increasing
iconicness of the park (p<0.001, uncorrected).
The
interaction of iconicness with the destructiveness of the
use as well as the requested donation amount correlated
with greater activity in the medial prefrontal cortex
(p<0.001, uncorrected), frequently characterized as an
information integration region for incentive processing.
Additionally, the interaction of destructiveness of the use
and requested donation amount was correlated with
increased activity in the anterior insula (p<0.001,
uncorrected), which responds broadly to aversive stimuli.
These findings implicate reward/incentive circuitry for
the processing of environmental valuation information
during WTP tasks. With further study, FMRI may be a
useful complement to surveys in assessing nonmarket
valuation of environmental resources.
H-02
EFFECTS OF INSTRUCTED KNOWLEDGE ON
AVERSIVE LEARNING Lauren Y. Atlas, New York
University; Bradley Doll, New York University; Jian Li, Peking
University; Nathaniel Daw, New York University; Elizabeth A.
Phelps, New York University - In humans, expectations
reflect both explicit knowledge and associative learning.
For example, if an individual receives an electric shock
every time she hears a tone, she will come to expect the
shock upon tone presentation after several pairings.
Alternatively, if she is simply informed about the
contingencies, she will expect a shock even upon the first
tone presentation. Most formal models of associative

learning assess responses as a function of reinforcement
history regardless of explicit knowledge. However, recent
studies of reward learning suggest that when participants
are instructed about stimulus contingencies, the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) inhibits learningrelated signals in the striatum (Li et al., 2011; Doll et al.,
2009). The aim of the present study was to understand
how instructed knowledge modulates brain responses
during aversive learning. Participants (n=64) were
randomly assigned to one of two groups: the Instructed
Group or the Feedback Group. All participants performed
the same Pavlovian aversive learning reversal paradigm
during fMRI scanning, wherein two visual cues were
presented. One cue (the CS+) was paired with a shock on
30% of trials, whereas the second (the CS-) was never
paired with a shock. The Instructed Group was informed
about the original contingencies, whereas the Feedback
Group received no explicit information. Following 8
presentations of each unreinforced CS and 4 presentations
of the US (i.e. 20 trials), the contingencies reversed: The
original CS- became the new CS+. There were three such
reversals across the session. Upon each reversal, the
Instructed Group was informed that contingencies
reversed, whereas the Feedback Group received no
explicit information. We examined responses in
participants who showed successful fear acquisition, as
measured by differential skin conductance responses
(SCRs) between the CS+ and CS- prior to the first reversal
(n=40). Fear expression tracked contingency reversals in
both groups: Participants showed larger SCRs for the
current CS+ than the current CS- throughout the task. We
used between-groups t-tests to examine the effects of
instructed knowledge on brain responses during aversive
learning, focusing on differential fear responses (i.e.
[current CS+ > current CS-]). We found group differences
in right DLPFC, such that the Instructed Group showed
greater DLPFC activation to the CS+ relative to the CS-,
whereas the Feedback Group did not show differences in
this region. Instructed knowledge also modulated
responses in bilateral hippocampus: The Instructed Group
showed hippocampal increases to the current CS- relative
to the current CS+, and these differences were not
observed in the Feedback Group. Our results indicate that
instructed knowledge influences brain responses during
aversive learning in humans and support a key role for
the DLPFC in maintaining instructed cue contingencies.
H-03
BROODING PREDICTS SUSTAINED ATTENTION
TO ERRORS AND HINDERS FEMALES' REBOUND
FROM FAILURE OVER TIME Ronald C. Whiteman,
Alexander Shusterman, Jennifer A. Mangels; Baruch College,
The CUNY Graduate Center - Rumination is a persistent
style of thinking that is characterized by evaluative selfreflection in response to negative mood and outcomes.
Despite claims that rumination is helpful for solving
problems and reducing negative affect, experimental and
clinical studies have often shown otherwise. Indeed,
ruminators tend to not only exhibit an attentional bias
towards negatively-valenced stimuli, but they also seem
to have difficulty disengaging from this material, perhaps
because of repeated introspection on its perceived self-

relevance. Neuroimaging studies corroborate these
findings, revealing that rumination is associated with
increased and prolonged amygdala activity in response to
negatively-valenced stimuli, as well as increased activity
in the default mode network. Nonetheless, not all kinds of
rumination may be bad - while being a “moody brooder”
is maladaptive, especially for females, a more “reflective
pondering” type of rumination may be adaptive. One
context in which these ruminative tendencies may become
active is in the face of academic failure. Surprisingly, no
work has explored whether and how rumination may
impact rebound from failure, especially as a function of
gender or as failures compound over time. Here, we
employed a challenging (65% errors) general knowledge
test-feedback-retest paradigm to examine whether
undergraduates’ scores on the Ruminative Responses
Scale (RRS) would influence the neural response to
negative feedback, the ability to use that feedback to
correct errors, and self-reported thoughts and feelings
throughout the task. In particular, we looked at whether
RRS scores would predict the amplitude of the Late
Positive Potential (LPP), a centro-parietally maximal
event-related potential (ERP) that has been shown to
index controlled visual attention and sustained arousal
processes in response to emotionally evocative stimuli.
The LPP can be contrasted with the earlier frontal
Feedback-Related Negativity (FRN), which indexes more
automatic orienting to worse than expected outcomes. We
predicted that brooding would hinder, but reflection
would facilitate, rebound from failure, especially for
females. Furthermore, we expected that brooding would
predict more negative thoughts and feelings, coupled
with an enhanced LPP (but no enhancements in the FRN)
following negative feedback. These responses should
become more pronounced as the task progresses and
failures accumulate. Indeed, as the task progressed,
females’ brooding RRS scores (over and above
depression) predicted increased negative thoughts and
feelings, coupled with poorer encoding of corrective
information. However, there was evidence that reflective
rumination could buffer this effect, at least earlier in the
task. The behavioral effects of rumination were largely
mirrored in the neural response to the performance
feedback. Again, for females only, brooding was
significantly associated with an enhanced LPP to errors
by mid-task, although by task’s end this relationship was
only marginally significant. Neither RRS subscale showed
any relationship to the FRN. Taken together, these results
suggest that females’ tendency to exhibit moody brooding
undermines their rebound from failure over time,
potentially because of heightened, prolonged attention to
error-related feedback. This pattern may be somewhat
ameliorated by the extent to which females tend to exhibit
reflective pondering, but these benefits are shorter-lived,
suggesting that they can be depleted in the face of
repeated failure.
H-04
NEURAL
RESPONSES
DURING
EMOTION
REGULATION ASSOCIATED WITH SUICIDAL
IDEATION
IN
BORDERLINE
PERSONALITY
DISORDER Alexa Hubbard, Columbia University; Jennifer

A. Silvers, Columbia University; Jocelyn Shu, Columbia
University; Hedy Kober, Yale University; Emily A. Biggs, New
York State Psychiatric Institute; Eric Fertuck, Columbia
University, New York State Psychiatric Institute; Jochen
Weber, Columbia University; Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia
University; Barbara Stanley, Columbia University, New York
State Psychiatric Institute - Borderline personality disorder
(BPD) is characterized by deficits in emotion regulation as
well as high rates of suicidal thoughts and behaviors.
Neuroimaging research is beginning to uncover the
neural correlates of emotional dysfunction in disorders
such as BPD. However, the way in which emotion
dysregulation, and its neural bases, relates to suicidal
tendencies in BPD is currently unclear. The present study
sought to examine the relationship between emotion
regulation, as assessed during an fMRI task, and the
clinical symptoms of BPD, including suicidal thoughts
and behaviors. Forty-seven women diagnosed with BPD
were scanned while performing a cognitive reappraisal
task that asked participants to view aversive images while
taking an immersed, emotional perspective or an
objective, distanced perspective. Ability to regulate was
measured by the drop in self-reported negative affect
participants reported on ‘distance’ trials in comparison to
‘close’ trials. Individual differences in suicidal tendencies
were measured by subjective self-reports of suicidal
ideation and objective records of suicide attempts. We
found that suicidal ideation predicted a greater number of
suicide attempts as well as lesser ability to down-regulate
negative affect and reduced activation of subgenual
anterior cingulate cortex (sgACC) during the reappraisal
task. The sgACC has been implicated in depression,
autonomic control, and emotional responding. As such,
these data suggest that suicidal tendencies in BPD are
linked to changes in behavioral and neural indices of
emotion regulation ability.
H-05
EXAMINING THE SAFETY SIGNAL VALUE OF
SOCIAL SUPPORT: AN INVESTIGATION OF
PREPARED SAFETY STIMULI Erica Hornstein, *SANS
Graduate Student Travel Award Winner, Naomi
Eisenberger; UCLA - Research has consistently highlighted
the benefits of social support for mental and physical
health, but the mechanisms underlying these benefits are
not well understood. In this research, we combine social
support research with well-established models of fear
conditioning and safety signaling in order to examine
whether social support figures act as “prepared safety
stimuli” during times of threat‚ naturally signaling safety
and reducing threat-related stress, leading to an inhibition
of fear learning. We hypothesize that social support
reminders, in the form of images of close others, will
interfere with fear learning such that individuals less
easily associate fear with their close others. To examine
this, we used a classic fear-conditioning paradigm,
investigating the strength of conditioned fear for 3
different types of stimuli: social support stimuli (images
of social support figures), stranger stimuli (images of
strangers), and neutral stimuli (images of flowers and
mushrooms). For each subject, images from each set were
first paired with shock, during an acquisition phase, and

then presented without shock, during an extinction phase,
in order to test the strength of fear associations. Results
showed that individuals formed typical fear associations
for stranger and neutral stimuli‚ strong conditioned fear
after acquisition, as measured by higher galvanic skin
response (GSR), that were reduced but still present after
extinction, as measured by marginally significant
differences. Social support stimuli, however, did not
produce any conditioned fear after acquisition, and,
because there was no initial conditioning, no response
was present after extinction. These results show that
people do not form fear associations for their social
support figures, suggesting that social support figures act
as prepared safety stimuli‚ inhibiting fear learning and
reducing threat-related stress‚ offering insight into the
links between social support and well-being.
H-06
PERFORMANCE-RELATED SOCIAL DOWNWARD
COMPARISON
IS
CHARACTERIZED
BY
INCREASED AND COUPLED ACTIVITY IN THE
VENTRAL STRIATUM AND THE ANTERIOR
CINGULATED CORTEX Lindner M., University of Bonn;
Kuss K., University of Bonn; Birg R., University of Bonn; Falk
A., University of Bonn; Weber B.134, University of Bonn,
University Hospital Bonn; Fliessbach K.124, University of
Bonn, University Hospital Bonn - The effect of social
comparison on brain processes has mainly been studied in
the context of monetary rewards. In this study we
investigated whether social comparison processes
exclusively based on non-monetary, performance-related
information yield similar effects on brain processing.
Thirty medical students performed multiple-choice tasks
on medical knowledge, and after receiving feedback on
the correctness of their answer they additionally received
the information how many medical students from an
independent reference group solved the task correctly.
Results show that in case of correct answers BOLD
activity in the ventral striatum and the dorsal anterior
cingulate / medial prefrontal cortex was negatively
related to the number of reference group members who
solved the task correctly (social downward comparison
effect). This means activity in these brain region was the
higher the more the individual performance deviated
positively from the average comparison group’s
performance. A similar reference group dependency was
not found for incorrect trials (social upward comparison).
An analysis of functional connectivity further showed an
increased interaction between the ventral striatum and
the anterior cingulated cortex during social downward
(but not upward) comparison. This study identifies brain
regions involved in social downward comparisons for
non-materialistic, performance-related information.
H-07
THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL STIMULUS VALUE ON
GOAL-DIRECTED AVERSIVE REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING Björn Lindström, Armita Golkar, Andreas
Olsson; Karolinska Institutet - Associations between stimuli
with intrinsic negative value (e.g., threatening faces) and
naturally aversive events (e.g., electric shocks) are more

easily learned than between stimuli lacking such value.
Such preferential learning has mainly been shown in the
context of classical conditioning. In spite of its importance
to real-world behavior, it is unclear if this learning bias
generalizes to goal-directed reinforcement learning in
humans. In the first experiment, we used a paradigm
where participants learned to choose the option (pictures
of angry or happy faces) that minimized the amount of
electric shocks they received. We manipulated the risk of
electric shocks for each option using a 2 (Phase:
Initial/Reversal)
x
2
(Group:
HappyToAngry/AngryToHappy) design, where the
happy face for one group initially represented the optimal
choice (P(Shock|Happy) = .25), but subsequently changed
to be the sub-optimal choice (P (Shock|Happy) = .75)
during the reversal phase. This design allowed us to
disentangle stimulus-driven and goal-directed processes
in their impact on reinforcement learning. The results
showed that the value inherit in the stimuli powerfully
impacted reinforcement learning. As predicted, we
observed facilitated learning when the angry face was
most predictive of electric shocks, relative to when the
happy face was most predictive of electric shocks. In the
second experiment, we extended these effects to the social
group domain. This was accomplished by using the same
reinforcement paradigm, but with stimuli signifying
social group belonging (emotionally neutral male black
and white faces shown to white participants). The results
showed that performance was superior when the outgroup (black) face was most predictive of electric shocks,
relative to when the in-group (white) face was most
predictive of electric shocks. These results extend
previous findings of preferential fear learning to outgroup faces in classical conditioning (Olsson et al, 2005),
by showing that also goal-directed behavior is influenced
by the stimulus’s social group belonging. The results from
both experiments could be reproduced by a simple
reinforcement learning model where the value of the
instrumental action (avoiding electric shocks) and the
stimulus identity (Exp.1 : Angry face. Exp.2: Out-group
face) was additive. This model parsimoniously explains
how the observed behavior can result from the
congruency or incongruence between an action (e.g.,
avoiding shocks) and stimulus value. Furthermore, by
positing separable valuation components for the
instrumental action and the stimulus value, the model
hints that these processes likewise could be separable in
the neural substrate. Previous research has shown that
amygdala-striatal
interactions
underlie
avoidance
learning (Delgado, Jou, LeDoux & Phelps, 2009),
suggesting that similar mechanisms might be recruited by
our experiment. For example, the instrumental value
could be represented by the medial prefrontal cortex and
the dorsal striatum, whereas the amygdala might
represent negative stimulus value. Taken together, these
experiments show that the value of social stimulus can
have a powerful impact on goal-directed reinforcement
learning.

H-08
NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING REVERSAL
LEARNING IN REWARD AND PUNISHMENT
CONTEXTS Feng Xue, Vitaliya Droutman, Gui Xue, Stephen
Read; University of Southern California - Adaptive decisionmaking in social and physical situations requires the
ability to quickly adjust responses to changing
environments. This flexibility is often measured using a
reversal-learning paradigm, in which participants need to
effectively overcome established associations and learn
new ones based on feedback. Although a number of
neural regions have been implicated in reversal learning,
the specific functional contribution of each in this context
remains unclear. A typical reversal-learning paradigm
involves at least three components: the detection of
contingency change, the reconfiguration of stimulusresponse mapping, and the expression of new behaviors
under the continuing interference of old associations. The
current study separates these components, by focusing on
contrasting reversal learning with initial acquisition
(general reinforcement learning). It also examines
whether the neural mechanisms involved are different for
reward and punishment. We used a learning paradigm
adopted from Ghahremani, et al (2010), where subjects
learn whether a novel image was associated with the left
or right key through deterministic feedback. The
contingency was then reversed and subjects learned the
new image-key association over 5 repetitions to high
accuracy. Each participant performed two sets of the task
on different days: one with monetary reward and one
with moderate electric shock as feedback in a
counterbalanced order. Forty-one men participated in the
study as part of a large-scale project examining the
behavioral and neural mechanisms of risky sexual
decision-making among young gay men. The present
functional imaging study identified three distinct neural
networks for reversal learning. Specifically, the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex showed strong activity
when comparing the first reversal error trials with initial
acquisition error trials, suggesting its role in detecting
contingency change. In contrast, the dorsal medial PFC
and the left parietal lobule showed strong activity when
comparing the first correct response after reversal with
the first correct response during acquisition after the
initial guess, suggesting their role in reconfiguring the
stimulus-response mapping and response switch. The
right OFC and insula were also found in this comparison.
The right OFC and insula were also found in the contrast
between subsequent reversal trials and initial learning
trials, consistent with their role in inhibiting the old
contingency and expressing relearned behaviors under
interference. These networks were highly overlapping for
the reward and punishment conditions. Behavioral results
show higher accuracy under the reward condition during
learning but not in the reversal phase. Decision-making
was faster under reward condition for both phases. By
comparing the brain responses at various stage of
learning between initial acquisition and reversal, we have
clearly dissociated subprocesses specific to reversal
learning, including the detection of contingency reversal,
stimulus-response remapping, and the expression of new
behavior under interference from prepotent responses.

Furthermore, the feedback manipulation revealed
overlapping mechanisms for reward and punishment
reversal learning. These results provide deeper insight
into the neural mechanisms of reversal learning, which
could help to understand the impulsive behaviors in risky
populations, such as drug use and risky sex.
H-09
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
RESPONSE
CAUTION ADJUSTMENT: EVIDENCE FROM A
MODEL-BASED NEUROSCIENCE APPROACH Frini
Karayanidis, University of Newcastle; Elise L. Mansfield,
University of Newcastle; Andrew Heathcote, University of
Newcastle; Birte U. Forstmann, University of Amsterdam,
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences
- Cortico-basal ganglia networks have been shown to
underpin flexible trial-by-trial adjustment of response
threshold, a latent diffusion model parameter that is used
as an index of response caution. Using a cued-trials taskswitching paradigm, Mansfield et al. (J Neurosci 2011,
31,14688-14692) showed that, consistent with distinct
cortico-basal ganglia networks for risky vs. cautious
decisions, response threshold setting was directly related
to BOLD activation in striatum for repeat trials and
inversely related to BOLD activation in subthalamic
nucleus for switch trials. In this study, we use diffusion
weighted imaging (DWI) to examine whether individual
differences in preference for a more risky or more
cautious response strategy are associated with structural
differences in cortico-basal ganglia networks. Separate
fronto-striatal networks were associated with adopting an
overall more risky or more cautious response threshold.
Specifically, preference for a riskier approach was
associated with higher fractional anisotropy (FA) in the
pre-supplementary motor area and the external capsule,
while preference for a more cautious strategy was
associated with higher FA in inferior frontal gyrus and
anterior limb of the internal capsule. In addition, FA in
these striatal regions mediated the relationship between
response threshold and the amplitude of the cue-locked
switch-positivity that is associated with advance
preparation. These findings are consistent with the
striatum being involved in setting both overall and trialby-trial response caution.
H-10
SELF-CONTROL
TRAINING
GENERATES
INCREASES IN NEURAL ACTIVITY RELATED TO
PREPARATION AND EXECUTION OF RESPONSE
INHIBITION Lauren E. Kahn, Junaid S. Merchant, Elliot T.
Berkman; University of Oregon - When our goals are not
aligned with our habitual behavior, we are challenged to
regulate our behavior. In cases like these, employing selfcontrol allows us to override our habits in order to act in
accordance with our goals. This type of self-control plays
a role in many aspects of daily life, including financial
transactions, health-related behaviors, and social
interactions. An open question is whether such selfcontrol can be improved with training, and what neural
systems support such improvements. In our study, sixty
adults underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging

(fMRI) in two sessions spaced three weeks apart, while
completing the stop-signal task (SST). In between the two
scanning sessions, half of the participants completed ten
six-minute SST training sessions and the other half
completed a control task. At each time point, self-control
capacity for each participant was quantified as his/her
stop-signal reaction time (SSRT), or the minimum time
required for the participant to inhibit the prepotent motor
response with 50% success when signaled to stop. The
training significantly improved inhibitory control: those
who completed the training sessions had greater
improvements in their SSRTs than those in the control
group. Furthermore, we compared brain activity during
Stop versus Go trials, and found that the extent of right
inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) activity increased with
respect to the slope of SSRT improvement over the ten
training sessions. Additionally, we looked at the Cue
period preceding the arrow stimulus - a period during
which participants are preparing for a trial that may or
may not require them to stop - and we found that activity
in a more anterior region in the right middle frontal gyrus
(rMFG) similarly increased with respect to the SSRT
improvement slopes. Thus, self-control improvement
outside the scanner, calculated as the SSRT slope, was
associated with increases in the activity two separate
brain regions (rIFG and rMFG), during two distinct
portions of response inhibition (execution and
preparation). These results may thus be elucidating two
components of the self-control improvement process: an
increase in the actual recruitment of self-control, as well
as an increase in the preparation of such recruitment.
H-11
AFFECTIVE
PRIMING
OCCURS
DURING
CONTINUOUS FLASH SUPPRESSION Regina C.
Lapate, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Bas Rokers,
University of Wisconsin- Madison, Utrecht University;
Richard J. Davidson, University of Wisconsin-Madison Continuous flash suppression (CFS; Tsuchiya & Koch,
2005) is an interocular suppression method that reliably
precludes conscious awareness of visual stimuli for long
durations (e.g., ~1000ms) relative to other more
commonly used visual masking techniques, such as
backward masking (~16.7-33ms). Given its robustness and
reduced restrictions in stimulus presentation times, CFS
could lend itself to a variety of paradigms in affective
neuroscience that seek to describe the function and neural
basis of conscious awareness in social-emotional
information processing. However, prior studies adopting
interocular suppression techniques such as binocular
rivalry (Zimba & Blake, 1983) and CFS (Kang et al., 2011)
have failed to find evidence of semantic priming by the
invisible stimulus. This raises the possibility that during
interocular suppression, stimulus processing is relatively
shallower compared to in backward masking paradigms,
where semantic analysis has been convincingly
demonstrated (e.g., Dehaene et al., 1998). Nonetheless,
because prior studies examining priming during
interocular suppression employed neutral words as the
invisible primes, it remains plausible that simpler,
biologically relevant pictorial stimuli, which may have
more direct access to meaning representations (Kouider &

Dehaene, 2007), could evoke priming. Thus, we here
sought to verify whether affective priming by emotional
faces occurs during CFS. Specifically, we conducted a 2
(Invisible Prime: Fearful vs. Neutral) x 2 (Visible Target:
Fearful vs. Neutral) factorial within-subjects experiment,
whereby individuals were asked to indicate the emotion
displayed in a visible target as quickly as possible using a
2-button response box. Fearful or neutral primes were
rendered invisible via CFS for 2 consecutive 1000ms
intervals, after which they were followed by a visible
fearful or neutral a target for a maximum of 2000ms (or
until the participant made a forced-choice target-emotion
categorization). Importantly, primes and targets did not
overlap in identity or in size, and primes were never
shown in the absence of CFS. Fifty-five individuals were
run, 46 of whom were unaware of the suppressed primes
as indexed by their performance in a 2-alternative forced
choice stimulus identification task, P(difference from
chance) > .1. Only correct target-emotion identification
trials were analyzed (93.1%), and reaction time (RT) data
were log-transformed to correct for skewness. The
analysis of participants’ RTs revealed a significant prime
by target interaction, F(1,45) = 5.8, P = .019, indicating that
when visible fearful targets were preceded by invisible
fearful primes, participants were faster to identify fear in
the target, relative to when fearful targets were preceded
by invisible neutral primes, P = .004. Therefore, this study
further establishes the utility of CFS as a technique to
successfully manipulate visual awareness while enabling
the processing of emotional valence of facial expressions.
In addition, these data suggest that the neural circuitry
upon which affective priming depends may differ from
the one supporting semantic priming.
H-12
THE ROLE OF MENTALIZING IN FACE MEMORY
Robert G. Franklin, Jr., Brandeis University; Reginald B.
Adams, Jr., The Pennsylvania State University; Nancy A.
Dennis, The Pennsylvania State University - Mentalizing, or
determining what another is feeling or thinking, and face
memory are two critical skills for social interaction.
Extensive work has examined how these processes work
individually, but little work has looked at the relationship
between these two social processes. Previously, we found
that faces that naturally evoked deeper mentalizing were
better remembered, indicating a possible behavioral
relationship between the two processes (Franklin &
Adams, 2009). However, no work has shown if
experimentally eliciting greater levels of mentalizing
leads to better memory or if there is a neural relationship
between the mechanisms involved with mentalizing and
face memory. Thirty participants completed two runs of
an encoding task while being scanned using fMRI, with
each run followed by a retrieval task. In each run of the
encoding task, participants viewed 48 faces each for 2.5
seconds in an event-related design. Preceding each face, a
mental state adjective was displayed for 1s and following
each face, participants were shown a scale for 4s where
they were asked to indicate the degree to which the
adjective matched what the person was feeling or
thinking. The adjectives preceding the faces were one of
six adjectives that indicated a complex mental state (e.g.,

depressed, reflective) or one of six adjectives that
indicated a basic mental state (e.g. bored, tired). Complex
and basic mental state adjectives were selected based on
ratings from pre-raters. Following each encoding run,
participants completed a retrieval task where they saw all
48 previously seen faces along with 42 novel faces and
indicated whether each face was a new or old face and
whether they were highly confident in their judgment or
had low confidence in their judgment. We found that
faces encoded with complex adjectives were better
remembered than those encoded with basic adjectives,
supporting the assertion that greater mentalizing leads to
better memory. Neural data were analyzed using SPM8
with a random-effects 2(encoding success: high
confidence hits (HCH) versus misses) X 2(mentalizing
condition: complex versus basic) ANOVA to examine
whether complexity of mentalizing moderated neural
activation involved with memory. We specifically
examined the interaction contrasting activation for
complex HCH to all other conditions (complex misses and
HCH and misses encoded with basic adjectives). This
interaction revealed increased activation in regions
involved with mentalizing, including the dorsal and
ventral medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and inferior
frontal gyrus as well as activation in regions involved
with face memory, including the left medial temporal lobe
and right fusiform gyrus. In addition, connectivity
analyses found that activation in the ventral mPFC was
correlated with activation in the hippocampus for
complex adjectives, indicating a neural relationship
between these two sets of activation, further supporting
the influence of mentalizing-related regions on face
memory.
These findings indicate that the neural
mechanisms involved with mentalizing are associated
with face memory and suggest that neural mechanisms
involved with mentalizing can moderate face memory.
This relationship specifically indicates the importance of
social messages contained within a face and how those
messages meaningfully influence the encoding of identity.
H-13
CAN ANGER MAKE YOU SMILE? HOW SOCIAL
POWER MODULATES SPONTANEOUS FACIAL
MIMICRY RESPONSES TO HIGH- AND LOWSTATUS OTHERS Evan W. Carr, Piotr Winkielman,
Christopher Oveis; University of California, San Diego Mimicry, the often nonconsious process of replicating
others’ actions, is critical in forging and strengthening
social bonds. Research has shown that social power—the
capacity to influence others—reduces deliberative actions
and consciously experienced feelings associated with
rapport, such as affiliation, empathy, and perspectivetaking. Yet, no study has examined how power influences
positive and negative emotional mimicry. To test this, we
measured facial electromyography (fEMG) from the
zygomaticus major (“smiling muscle”) and corrugator
supercilii (“frowning muscle”) while participants
watched happy and angry videos of high- and low-status
targets after being induced into different feelings of
power. High-power participants reduced smiling mimicry
toward high-status targets, whereas low-power
participants returned smiles to all targets in a deference

response. With frowning mimicry, all conditions
displayed a more differentiated mimicry pattern to highstatus targets. The results are the first to demonstrate that
both power and status interact to affect low-level
emotional mimicry processes.
H-14 *SANS Poster Award Winner
THE ROLE OF MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
BEYOND THE SELF: A COMPARISON OF SOCIAL
VS. ACADEMIC APPRAISALS Jordan L. Livingston,
University of Oregon; Lauren E. Kahn, University of Oregon;
Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA; John C. Mazziotta, UCLA;
Mirella Dapretto, UCLA; Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University of
Oregon - The precise role of medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) in social and affective processing currently
remains unclear. Studies investigating self-referential
processing have now demonstrated that self-appraisals
are strongly associated with activation in mPFC.
However, activation in mPFC has also been implicated in
more general social cognition tasks. To further probe the
broader role of mPFC, the current study tested whether
this region shows preferential activation for social
appraisals vs. academic appraisals, and if so, whether this
activation is stable over development. Specifically, we
analyzed data from the first longitudinal, within-subjects
fMRI study that investigated self and other appraisals
across domains. Typically-developing children and
adolescents (N=27) were recruited for a longitudinal
study at age 10 (time 1) and again at age 13 (time 2). In
fMRI sessions at both time points, participants listened to
evaluative phrases in both the social and academic
domain and judged the extent to which each phrase was
descriptive of the self and of another target, Harry Potter,
about whom the participants had substantial knowledge.
Data was preprocessed (including realignment,
coregistration, normalization to the MNI template, and
spatial smoothing) in NeuroElf and was modeled at the
single subject and group level using SPM8. Results
demonstrated an overall preferential activation in cortical
midline structures (mPFC and medial posterior parietal
cortex) as well as in right temporoparietal junction for
social vs. academic information. A “logical and”
conjunction analysis revealed all of these regions to be
active above threshold in the social vs. academic contrast
for both self and other appraisals and at both time 1 and
time 2. Overall, results highlight the important role that
social vs. academic information plays in activation of
mPFC. We explore reasons why mPFC might show
preference for social information, particularly in a
developing population.
H-15
DETECTING FACIAL EXPRESSION PROCESSING
DEFICITS FOLLOWING ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX
DAMAGE Megan L. Willis, Australian Catholic University,
Macquarie University; Romina Palermo, ARC Centre of
Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, University of
Western Australia; Ky McGrillen, Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital; Laurie Miller, ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition
and its Disorders, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, University of
Sydney - Patients who have sustained damage to the

orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) often exhibit changes in their
emotional and social functioning. One deficit that may
underlie abnormal emotional and social functioning is
impaired facial expression recognition. However,
evidence of deficits in facial expression recognition
abilities in patients with OFC damage has been found in
some, but not all previous experimental investigations.
The aim of the current study was to determine if these
inconsistencies may be a consequence of certain facial
expression processing tasks being more sensitive in
detecting deficits than others. We examined the
performance of individuals with damage to the OFC on
four different tasks assessing facial expression processing.
The group of seven OFC patients demonstrated an
impaired ability to label negative facial expressions (i.e.,
anger, disgust, fear and sadness) shown for a short time
(500ms) when compared to a group of six control patients
with frontal lesions that spared the OFC and a group of 25
healthy controls. When facial expressions were shown for
a long time (5000ms), the OFC patient group’s
performance did not differ significantly from the nonOFC patient group or the healthy control group. The OFC
patient group also exhibited an impaired ability to match
subtle negative facial expressions, compared to both the
patient and healthy control groups. However, no such
deficit was observed when the OFC patient group
matched prototypical facial expressions. The deficits
recognising negative facial expressions presented for a
short duration and of reduced intensity were evident
despite the OFC patients displaying intact emotional
conceptual knowledge and low-level perceptual
processing of faces. The results suggest that tasks that are
not readily amenable to the use of cognitive strategies
appear to be sensitive to facial expression recognition
deficits following damage incorporating the OFC. We
propose that the results provide support for the
suggestion that the OFC plays an important role in
linking the perceptual representation of a facial
expression to the conceptual knowledge associated with
the signaled emotion.
H-16 *SANS Poster Award Winner
SOCIAL CLOSENESS AND DECISION CONTEXT
MODULATE RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR Kamila E. Sip,
David V. Smith, Mauricio R. Delgado; Rutgers University Risky decision making is modulated by a myriad of social
factors. Little is known, however, about how input from
close friends affects risk taking in economic decisions. To
investigate whether social feedback from a close friend
modulates risk taking, we employed a financial decisionmaking task that has been used to study framing effects
(cf. De Martino et al., 2006, Science). On each trial,
participants (N=31, 15 females) were presented with a
monetary endowment ($50 or $100) before choosing
between sure and gamble options. The sure option was
framed such that the participant could keep (gain frame)
or lose (loss frame) a fixed proportion of the endowment.
The gamble option did not differ according to frame and
was represented by a pie chart reflecting the probability
(20, 40, 60, and 80%) of winning or losing the entire
endowment. On half the trials, participants received
occasional positive (e.g., “Man, you are great at this!”) or

negative (e.g., “Come on, you can do better!”) feedback
from a gender-matched friend observing their choices.
Consistent with a framing effect, we found that
participants gambled more in the loss frame compared to
the gain frame. Social feedback also affected gambling
behavior, where participants gambled less in the gain
frame following positive social feedback. We evaluated
this interaction further by examining whether the change
in gambling behavior was specific to social feedback or
the frame of the preceding trial. We found that positive
social feedback attenuated the framing effect only for
trials that were preceded by a gain frame. These
behavioral effects were modulated individual differences
in social closeness: higher social closeness predicted
increased risk-taking behavior in the loss frame.
Preliminary neuroimaging analyses indicated that the
receipt of social feedback in contrast to no social feedback
evoked activation in regions such as bilateral anterior
insula, inferior frontal gyrus, temporal poles and
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which have been
previously implicated in the process of understanding
intentions of other. Using ventromedial prefrontal cortex
as a region of interest, we also found that social closeness
influenced the effect of frame and social feedback, where
social feedback only affected activation evoked by frame
for individuals reporting low social closeness to their
friend. These results highlight the power and diversity of
social influence on decision making, potentially pointing
to the mechanisms that help shape our interpersonal
choices.
H-17
UNDERSTANDING OTHERNESS Lisa Aziz-Zadeh, SookLei Liew, Tong Sheng, Mona Sobhani, Glenn Fox; University of
Southern California - Individuals can differ from the self on
a multitude of dimensions, including having a different
body, ethnicity, gender, personality, or degree of
likability. In a series of fMRI experiments we explore the
neural correlates of how we understand individuals who
are dissimilar from the self. First we explore the most
dramatic difference - having a different body than the self.
In this study, we investigated how a congenital amputee
(D.D.) process actions made by body parts they do not
have and actions that are impossible for them, even with
another effector. We find that when the action is possible
for D.D., the inferior frontal/inferior parietal action
observation network is active. However, when the action
is impossible for D.D., mentalizing regions are
additionally recruited. We also find that when D.D.
views pain in a body part that she does not have as
compared to one she does, there is activity in the insula
and ACC, but not the somatosensory cortices. Thus she
may “feel” the other’s pain, but may not be able to
localize it. Next we consider the neural correlates of how
we understand a body that is both different from our own
and we have never seen before. In this study, typically
developed individuals viewed actions made by the
residual limb of individuals with amputations. We find
increased activity in the posterior parietal cortex when
viewing novel, residual limb actions as opposed to more
familiar hand actions. Interestingly, this effect is
modulated by visual training and life experience with

individuals with residual limbs. In addition, we discuss
data on observing dislikable individuals. In this study,
Jewish individuals watched dislikable Neo-Nazis perform
an action or experience pain. Data indicate modulation of
the frontal component of the action observation network
and the pain matrix based on likability. During pain
processing, modulation was functionally correlated with
activity in the prefrontal cortex. Finally we discuss the
effects of race and familiarity on action understanding in
a study where Chinese individuals view Caucasians make
familiar or unfamiliar actions. We find increased
mentalizing activity for familiar actions and increased
parietal activity for actions made by individuals of the
same race as the viewer. Putting this data together, a
neural model for understanding dissimilar others will be
discussed.
H-18
CHANGES IN SUBCORTICAL AREAS OF INTEREST
SEEN IN PANIC DISORDERED POPULATIONS POST
PSYCHOTHERAPEUTIC
TREATMENTS
Inga
Korsgaard, Andrew Gerber, Barbara Milrod Weill Cornell,
Bradley Peterson; Columbia University - MRI is invaluable
for studying the neurobiological mechanisms of
psychiatric disorders and biological markers of treatment
response. In this 2-site study, we performed MRI scans
on subjects before and after undergoing three
psychotherapies
(Panic-Focused
Psychodynamic
Psychotherapy, PFPP, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy,
CBT, and Applied Relaxation Training, ART) for DSM-IV
Panic Disorder (PD). We also scanned a fourth group of
healthy, matched controls across the same time interval.
We aimed to demonstrate pre-treatment brain
abnormalities in PD patients compared with healthy
controls. Additionally, we explored changes specific to
each of the three psychotherapies. We hypothesized that
PD emerges from a combined disorder of inappropriate
activity in subcortical fear circuitry (predominantly from
the amygdala and hippocampus) and insufficient cortical
control over the ensuing affective state. We used surface
analyses to study sub-regions of the amygdala and
hippocampus involved in these emotional processes.
Functional MRI studies of self-regulatory control and
affective processing elaborated the functional roles of the
prefrontal cortex (PFC), amygdala, and hippocampus in
our model. We hypothesized that psychotherapy works
by improving cortical control over excessive subcortical
activity.
In this study we used the Simon Spatial
Incompatibility task and the Affective Response and
Control task fMRI paradigms. The utility of fMRI
depends critically on the choice of task and control
conditions and how well their comparison isolates a
mental process that is of central interest to the
pathophysiological process under study. We analyzed
fMRI data from the first 17 baseline pilot scans in panic
patients and compared them to 13 age, sex, and race
matched controls who completed the same tasks. On the
Simon task subjects with panic disorder showed greater
activity in the amygdala and posterior attentional
circuitry (premotor, parietal cortex bilaterally) during
incongruent trials that activate prefrontal control in
comparison with healthy controls. These findings suggest

that anxiety interferes with performance and forces more
recruitment of attentional circuitry in panic subjects. On
the Affect task subjects with panic disorder showed less of
the association found in healthy controls between extreme
ratings of valence (either positive or negative) and
increased activity of the posterior cingulate/parietal
cortex. This suggests a difficulty in the panic subjects in
the judgment of emotional salience of affective stimuli.
We have preprocessed and analyzed fMRI data from 5
subjects scanned pre and post psychotherapy in the panic
disorder study. During the Simon task patients showed
greater activity in brain regions after therapy associated
with cognitive control of emotion but less activity in
regions closely linked to the experience of emotion. On
the Affect task patients showed less association after
therapy between amygdala activity and ratings of
valence.
These preliminary findings suggest that
psychotherapy can boost cognitive and attentional control
and further disengage affective systems linked to
emotional salience as seen compared to baseline activity.
Successful refinement of these models will allow us to
advance our understanding of PD, to develop new
pharmacologic
and
psychotherapeutic
treatments
targeted to individual aspects of the disorder, and to
predict which treatments will work best for which
individuals.
H-19
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
EMPATHY
MODULATE NEURAL ACTIVITY CORRESPONDING
TO SUBJECTIVE AGREEMENT OF POLITICAL
INFORMATION David Chou, Vijeth Iyengar, Roberto
Cabeza; Duke University - While there have been a number
of studies examining both the individual differences and
neural correlates characterizing those of differing political
ideologies, political interest or sophistication, (Kaplan et
al., 2007; Amodio et al., 2007; Knutson et al., 2006; Gozzi
et al., 2010), less research has focused on how individual
differences in empathy interact with political judgments
(but see Falk et al., 2012). To address this and other issues,
we scanned participants in an alternating encodingretrieval memory task. During encoding, participants
viewed unfamiliar faces paired with political statements
(e.g. Believes social security should be abolished) and
rated the statements on a 4-point scale ranging from
“strongly disagree” to “strongly agree.” During retrieval,
participants made intact or recombined judgments for
previously encoded faces paired with either the original
statements (intact trials) or with statements previously
paired with other faces (recombined trials), along with
confidence ratings. After the study, participants
completed a battery of follow-up questionnaires assessing
individual differences on a variety of measures including
empathic concern (as measured by the interpersonal
reactivity index (IRI)). Consistent with the enhancing
effect of emotion on memory encoding, behavioral
findings showed a U-shaped function with better memory
for statements with which participants strongly
agreed/disagreed in contrast to those eliciting more
moderate agree/disagree ratings. When collapsing levels
of agreement/disagreement and subsequently contrasting
activity for trials endorsed with an agree response versus

those trials endorsed with a disagree response (Agree >
Disagree), activity was evoked in a set of regions
including the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). When
interrogating the reverse contrast (Disagree > Agree),
activity was observed in a set of regions that included a
more dorsal region of the mPFC. Critically, it was
observed that neural activity in areas within the mPFC,
our functional region of interest, determined from the
contrasts described above, were modulated by the extent
to which participants engaged in empathic constructs
critical for mentalizing, as measured by the IRI. These
preliminary findings add to an already large body of
evidence attributing the role of the mPFC in cognitive
processes of emotional evaluation, self-referential
processing, and autobiographical memory. They also add
to a growing literature wherein findings have emerged,
linking differences in empathy and activity in a network
of regions, including the mPFC, reliably associated with
mentalizing (Wagner et al., 2011). Ultimately, these
preliminary findings may further highlight the role of
individual differences in mentalizing on the neural
processing of information that are either in line or in
opposition to one’s own beliefs.
H-20 *SANS Poster Award Winner
A SOCIAL DIMENSION TO THE AFFECTIVE
CIRCUMPLEX Shir Atzil, Northeastern University; Ajay
Satpute, Northeastern University; Tor Wager, University of
Colorado at Boulder; Lisa Feldman Barrett, Northeastern
University - Emotion is often experienced in social context.
Motivation to socially interact with others is a
fundamental feature in evolution (for example in
parenting and reproduction behaviors). Does that mean
that specific brain regions or networks have emerged to
support social functions? An alternative explanation
would suggest that basic components interact to manifest
social behaviors, and that there is no categorical
distinction between social and non-social brain functions.
Hence, the repertoire of neural responses to social and
non-social stimuli could represent the two ends of one
axis, rather than rely on separate brain mechanisms. In
this study, our goal was to review the consistent
characteristics of the "social affective brain" and compare
it to non-social affective brain responses. We surveyed the
neuroimaging literature for studies that used social or
non-social cues to induce positive or negative affect. We
then pooled across 401 contrasts and performed a metaanalysis using the Multi-Kernel Density Analysis method.
We separately analyzed four conditions: A) social cues
that induced positive valence (such as a loved person), B)
non-social cues that induced positive valence (such as
food), C) social cues that induced negative valence (such
as fearful people), and D) non-social cues that induced
negative valence (such as spiders). Results show that
consistently across the literature, brain responses to social
cues involve three components: visual perception regions
(including the fusiform face area), a socialmotivation/affiliation network (Bickart et al., 2012)
(including the ventral striatum, medial amygdala and
ACC), and a salience network (Downar et al., 2001)
(including the IFG insula). Interestingly, the ventral
striatum was involved in the response to social cues,

whether the valence was positive or negative. This result
is consistent with recent work that gives a key role to
dopamine secretion in the nucleus accumbens in exertion
of effort and motivation, rather than mediating a hedonic
pleasure response (Salamone et al.,2012). Additionally,
many regions that have been implicated in social
cognition, such as the ACC, insula, amygdala and IFG
were also consistently activated in non-social positive
valence paradigms. On the other hand, unique activations
included the extra-striate cortex (also known as the extrastriate body area [Downing 2001]) in the social positive
condition, the fusiform in the social conditions regardless
of valence, and SMA and motor regions to positive
valence regardless of the social value of the stimuli,
possibly suggesting an appetitive approach response. Our
results, consistently with the conceptual act model,
support the hypothesis that different qualities of a
stimulus, such as valence and sociality, are represent in
the brain as continuum axes, rather than have a dedicated
brain region that has specifically evolved to process them.
According to this hypothesis, domain-general networks
are performing basic psychological functions, and the
mental states required by different tasks are constructed
from their interaction. Such approach offers a different
dissection of neural brain responses, and searches for
continuous changes to describe different psychological
phenomena, as appose to a localized and functionallycategorical approach to affective neuroscience.
H-21
BE NICE IF YOU HAVE TO - A CAUSAL ROLE FOR
THE DLPFC IN STRATEGIC FAIRNESS Sabrina Strang,
University of Bonn; Jörg Groß, Maastricht University; Teresa
Schuhman, Maastricht University; Arno Riedl, Maastricht
University; Alexander Sack, Maastricht University; Bernd
Weber, University of Bonn; Armin Falk, University of Bonn Humans have the remarkable ability to inhibit their
selfish impulses for the sake of socially valued goals.
Every favor one is asked for implies a comparison
between self-interests and social norms and usually we
opt for the socially appropriate option (Glimcher et al.
2009). In order to make this kind of socially appropriate
decisions it is necessary to control impulses associated
with self-interest. The strain between selfish goals on the
one hand and socially valued goals on the other hand is
illustrated in the Ultimatum Game. In the Ultimatum
Game one participant has to divide a sum of money and
the other participant is asked to either accept or reject this
allocation. Most people reject unfair offers (that are very
unequal allocations), which ultimately leads to a loss for
both participants. When deciding how to split a given
amount of money, it is therefore important to anticipate
these fairness concerns and control the selfish impulse to
allocate most of the money to oneself. In a parametric
version of the Ultimatum Game (a Dictator Game with
punishment opportunity), Spitzer et al. (2007) showed
that participants allocated significantly more money to
the other players when the other player had the
possibility to reject (punish) unfair offers compared to a
situation in which the other participant could only accept.
This 'strategic fairness' was correlated with higher activity
in the rDLPFC. Here we test whether the DLPFC plays a

causal role in the ability to control selfish impulses and
act strategically fair. Participants had to make allocations
in a Dictator Game with and without punishment option.
While making this decisions either the right or the left
DLPFC was disrupted using transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS). In a third additional condition we
used sham TMS to either left or the right DLPFC.
Assuming that the right DLPFC plays a causal role in
anticipating fairness concerns and/or controlling selfish
impulses, disrupting the rDLPFC should lead to an
overall decrease of offers and a smaller degree of strategic
fairness adaption (as measured by the difference in offers
between punishment and no-punishment treatment). Both
hypotheses are supported by our data.
H-22
ON THE EVOLUTION AND DISSOLUTION OF
TRUST BETWEEN OUTGROUP MEMBERS Adam
Magerman, Matt Deegan, Kelly Jordan, Eric Hehman, Sam
Gaertner, Mike Kuhlman, & Chad Forbes - Interpersonal
trust, or the extent to which individuals trust each other,
is the foundation of human society.
Whether an
individual places their life in the hands of a doctor or
hopes their hairdresser is competent, people are
constantly deciding whom to trust and when. Despite the
importance of understanding how we learn to trust
others, little is known about how these mechanisms
develop, or are undermined, over time as a function of
who the other person is and how they are behaving.
Further complicating matters is the degree to which
preexisting biases, e.g., stereotypes or prejudice, may
undermine the evolution of trust between two strangers.
According Dovidio et al. (2010), whites tend to report less
chronic trust towards ethnic outgroup members and
greater implicit bias in general, indicating that the
development of trust between whites and novel ethnic
outgroup members may be inherently complex, sensitive
and prone to dissolution. We examine this question
directly using a social neuroscience approach. Two
studies were conducted to test the hypothesis that trust
towards ambiguously behaving outgroup members
evolves differently over time compared to ingroup
members. Study 1 examined whether white participants’
trust toward a Black confederate was dependent on how
the confederate was actually behaving. To test this
hypothesis, white participants took part in a coin flip
game with a Black Confederate via teleconferencing
software (this was actually pre-recorded video). In the
coin flip paradigm, the reporter (who was always the
black confederate) supposedly views a simulated coin
flip, and is tasked with reporting the outcome of that coin
flip to the player (who was always the white subject).
Participants were told that at various points throughout
the game it would be monetarily beneficial for the
reporter to lie. The player is then asked to either trust
what the reporter is telling them or not. Participants
completed 10 blocks of 10 trials. The reporter was
programmed to behave ambiguously but skew towards
trustworthy (behaving in a trustworthy manner on 55% of
the trials) or untrustworthy (behaving in an
untrustworthy manner on 55% of the trials) behaviors.
This allowed us to examine interpersonal trust on a trial-

by-trial basis. Results revealed a high variability of
trusting behavior among white participants, regardless of
whether the confederate behaved in a more trustworthy
manner or not.
Specifically, while all participants
exhibited trusting behaviors initially, this trust quickly
dissolved, spiked and ultimately decreased to outright
non-trusting behaviors at below chance levels. Study two
examined the neural correlates underlying these
behaviors and whether trust towards ingroup members
was more stable. Continuous EEG activity was recorded
while white participants completed the coin flip game
with either a white or black confederate. EEG Results
revealed interesting dynamics between medial and lateral
regions of the brain and areas important for person
perception.
Together these findings indicate that
interpersonal trust between outgroup members is
irascible and independent of outgroup members’ actual
behavior. These perceptions manifest at the neural level
to alter how regions important for person perception
interact on the order of milliseconds.
H-23
AUDIBLE
SMILES
AND
FROWNS
DURING
SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Anne van Leeuwen,
Hugo Quené, Jos van Berkum; Utrecht Institute of Linguistics
OTS, Utrecht University - We often smile (and frown)
while we talk. Listeners to such affective speech have to
integrate the affective and the linguistic cues in the speech
signal. Following up on earlier work (see Quené et al.,
2012), we investigated whether and how affective
phonetics (i.e. vocal expressions such as smiling) and
affective semantics (sentence-level meaning) interact
during spoken language comprehension of sentences and
how perspective modifies these interactions. We explored
this by presenting phonetically and semantically
manipulated spoken Dutch sentences to listeners while
collecting behavioral and neural (ERP) measurements.
The target materials consisted of utterances that contained
a positive or negative content word. Additionally,
perspective was taken into account so that sentences were
in first person (‘ik’) or in third person (‘hij’ or ‘ze’).
Utterances were phonetically manipulated using Praat’s
LPC analysis and resynthesis. Between analysis and
resynthesis, the formant frequencies were manipulated
(upwards or downwards shift: 10%) to imitate the spectral
effects of facial expressions while talking (Ohala, 1980;
Quené et al., 2012). This resulted in affective congruent
realizations (positive - smiling, negative - frowning), or
affective incongruent realizations (negative - smiling,
positive - frowning). An example of an incongruent item
would be ‘Ik heb een prijs gekregen’ (‘I have got a prize’)
spoken with a frown. In the EEG study, participants just
listened to the utterances while we measured their brain
response 200 ms before until 1000 ms after the onset of the
critical word. In the behavioral study, two different
groups of participants were asked to judge whether the
utterance (truncated at the offset of the critical word) was
positive/negative
(in
terms
of
meaning),
or
smiling/frowning (in terms of articulation). The general
predictions were that incongruent sentences were
responded to more slowly and eliciting a greater N400
component than congruent sentences. We were especially

interested in the effect of perspective: would listening to
first person perspective result in a qualitative and/or
quantitative different response than the responses to third
person perspective? We hypothesized that perspective
would modify the effects because in the case of first
person perspective the speaker’s expression and
unfolding sentence meaning both convey direct
information about the affective state of the speaker, while
in the third person case this link between expression and
utterance meaning is less clear. Results will be discussed
in the light of affective processing and how smiling and
frowning influence the way listeners process speech. We
will also discuss perspective and how perspective
modifies responses to affective stimuli. References (1)
Quené, H., Semin, G. R., & Foroni, F. (2012). Audible
smiles and frowns affect speech comprehension. Speech
Communication.
H-24
TRANSIENT PHASE-LOCKING OF PARIETAL
RESPONSES TO REPEATED FACES: NEUROIMAGE
EVIDENCE OF SUBLIMINAL MERE EXPOSURE RueiJyun Hung, National Yang-Ming University; Li-Fen Chen,
National Yang-Ming University; Yong-Sheng Chen, National
Chiao Tung University - Affect has been recognized as an
important factor of judgment and decision making.
Numerous studies have demonstrated the effect of mere
exposure, repeatedly presenting a stimulus to an
individual, on creating her/his positive attitude or
preference for that stimulus. One speculation of this
phenomenon is that repeated exposure modulates one’s
affective state toward positive through enhanced
familiarity. Broaden-and-build model was proposed that
positive emotion advantages individuals to explore novel
objects, which implicates that individuals with negative
characteristic tends to behave more conservatively and
towards things with higher familiarity. However, the
neural mechanism underlying mere exposure effect
(MEE) and how personalities affect the formation of MEE
are still unclear. This study aimed at elucidating temporal
dynamics of formation of mere exposure effect and in
which cortical extent of that this effect subsequently
correlates with personalities. We hypothesized that
repeated exposure increases positive affect through
cortical regions involving the frontal and parietal cortices
related to familiarity processing and the changes of brain
activities positively correlate with negative personalities.
To test these hypotheses, we conducted a subliminal
experiment with a 2 (exposure; single vs. repeated) x 2
(emotion; happy vs. neutral) factorial design, including
four sessions and 72 face images in total. During the
exposure period, subjects were presented each face for 17
ms and subsequently masked with a scrambled face
image. Subjective liking ratings for each exposed face and
implicit affect ratings for unexposed neutral object images
were measured by a four-point response pad after face
exposure session. Thirty-three healthy volunteers were
recruited in this study. Their magnetoencephalography
(Vectorview, Elekta Neuromag, Finland) were recorded
and analyzed by estimating neural synchrony using
phase-locking factor together with permutation test.
Repeated effect was tested using a paired t-test and

emotion induction effect was tested using a two-sample t
test. Behavioral results showed that repeated exposure to
neutral faces significantly increased positive emotion
feeling (t(31) = 2.639, p = .013). The early MEE was
observed at 20-30 ms post-onset over parietal regions.
Subjects with relatively stronger emotion induction effect
evidenced higher phase-locked responses in the parietal
regions, correlating positively with level of anxiety (r(17)
= 0.48, p = .044). Our findings suggest that parietal
regions would play an important role in formation of
MEE, which may associate with personality.
H-25
BRAIN
SYSTEMS
INVOLVED
IN
MAKING
UTILITARIAN JUDGMENTS IN MORAL DECISIONMAKING So Young Choe, University of Colorado Boulder;
Scott Schafer, University of Colorado Boulder; Tor Wager,
University of Colorado Boulder; Kyoung-Min Lee, Seoul
National University - The affective/intuitive system of
moral judgment has been more emphasized than the
reasoning/deliberative system recently. Although recent
research has emphasized emotion\'s role in utilitarian
judgments, the neural basis of the traits of individuals
that contribute to those judgments has not been focused
on. Two functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
studies and a behavioral study were conducted to
examine differences in the neurobiological mechanisms
between subjects who are either high in utilitarian
judgments (“High Utilitarian”), who tend to endorse
more harmful actions for the greater good, or low in
utilitarian judgments (“Low Utilitarian”), who do not
endorse harmful actions, even when such actions would
serve the greater good. Using personal moral utilitarian
judgment scenarios (Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom,
Darley, & Cohen, 2001), previous research found
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) damage
increased utilitarian judgment (Koenigs, Young, Adolphs,
Tranel, Cushman, Hauser, et al., 2007). In our studies,
groups pre-selected from a large sample to be High
Utilitarian subjects vs. Low Utilitarian subjects make
judgments about whether to opt-in to harm another for
the greater good in three types of scenarios: High-benefit
scenarios involve a difficult decision between the ‘greatest
good’ and the emotional aversiveness of the action (e.g.,
pushing a man off a bridge) that must be taken to obtain
it. Low-benefit decisions involve a similar aversive
action, but without a clear ‘greater good.’ We found that
High Utilitarian participants (relative to Low Utilitarian
participants) show increased activation in vmPFC for
high-benefit compared to low-benefit choices. This
finding suggests that vmPFC activity is not necessarily
related to the emotional impact of the scenario, as the
greatest activation is shown by those who are most
resistant to the emotional impact. Rather, it may be a
marker for the difficulty of decisions involving
approach/avoid conflicts in the social domain.
Consistent with this view, Low Utilitarian participants
subjects show decreased activation in left anterior insula
for high-benefit compared to non-moral choices.
Additionally, Low Utilitarian subjects had decreased
activation in right anterior insula compared to High
Utilitarian subjects for when comparing moral to non-

moral judgments. These results suggest that low and high
utilitarians approach utilitarian moral judgments in
markedly different ways.
H-26
OBJECTS ASSOCIATED WITH SELF THROUGH
IMAGINED OWNERSHIP LATER SPONTANEOUSLY
ENGAGE BRAIN AREAS RECRUITED DURING
EXPLICIT SELF-REFERENCING Kyungmi Kim, Marcia K.
Johnson; Yale University - The concept of self can extend
beyond activities of mind and the sense of body, for
example, when self-relevant people or objects are
included into one\'s sense of self (extended self: Belk,
1991). Neural support for the notion of extended self was
recently provided by a study using an imagined
ownership procedure: even when objects were transiently
associated with the participants through imagined
ownership, medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), a brain area
typically recruited during explicit self-referencing,
showed greater activation when people imagined objects
belonging to them compared to someone else (Kim &
Johnson, 2012). Based on these findings of MPFC activity
during ownership imagination, the current study
investigated whether self-relevant objects spontaneously
engage MPFC subsequent to the ownership manipulation.
We hypothesized that to the extent that MPFC
involvement during ownership imagination reflects
acquiring associations between self and objects, selfassociated objects should later spontaneously engage
MPFC and possibly other cortical midline structures (e.g.,
posterior cingulate cortex [PCC]) even when the task does
not require explicit self-referencing (cf., implicit selfreferencing for personal semantic facts, Moran,
Heatherton, & Kelley, 2009; for self-schema-relevant
stimuli, Rameson, Satpute, & Lieberman, 2010). During
fMRI scanning, participants performed a color oddball
detection task where they were instructed to respond only
to object pictures with a specific frame color (i.e., oddball).
Critically, there were 4 object types: objects imagined
prior to the scan to belong to the participants (Mine) or to
someone else (Other), previously unseen non-oddball
objects (Neutral), and previously unseen oddball target
objects (Oddball). Preference ratings for the objects were
obtained pre-ownership and post-scan to measure pre- vs.
post-ownership preference change (i.e., mere ownership
effect; Beggan, 1992). Also, during the post-scan phase,
participants retrospectively rated how well during the
pre-scan phase they could imagine owning each of the
Mine items. The results showed that for Mine items, those
objects that the participants were more successful at
imagining owning showed greater activation compared to
Other in MPFC as well as in PCC, suggesting that selfreported strength of association between oneself and
objects modulated activity in these self-referential brain
regions. In addition, increased preference (mere
ownership effect) for the objects assigned to self, another
behavioral manifestation of self-object associations, was
also reflected in greater activity in MPFC. Overall, by
demonstrating (1) spontaneous engagement of MPFC and
PCC by objects associated with self through imagined
ownership and (2) greater activity in MPFC for objects
rated as more successfully imagined as belong to oneself

and for objects showing mere ownership effect, the
present study provides strong neural evidence for the
incorporation of personally relevant external stimuli into
one's sense of self.
H-27
WHEN THE BRAIN GETS THE UPPER HAND: THE
EFFECTS OF MOTOR ACTION ON EMPATHY Shaham
G., Hebrew University of Jerusalem; Perry A., University of
Haifa; Aviezer H., Hebrew University of Jerusalem; Bentin S.,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem - Introduction: Performing a
motor action and viewing the same action performed by
another produces similar brain activations. This
phenomenon has been termed \"motor resonance\" and
theories suggest that it is one of the mechanisms enabling
empathy. However, support is usually limited to
correlational data, not allowing to infer causality. If one
could experimentally manipulate motor resonance, it
would be possible to test its causal connection to
empathy.
Continuous muscle contraction elicits far
reaching cognitive effects that can last up to several
minutes after the motor manipulation. These effects are
attributed
to
the
spreading
of
Mu-rhythm
desynchronization over central and frontal brain areas.
Interestingly, during action observation, motor resonance
is thought to be indexed by similar Mu rhythm
desynchronization. It is possible then, that the muscle
contraction paradigm can also affect motor resonance.
Hypothesizing that such modulation can indeed occur,
we explored the possibility of affecting empathic ability
by activating the motor system. Methods: Participants
were instructed to either squeeze a ball with their left
hand, right hand or both their hands or simply to rest
their hands on their knees for 4 minutes.
Then,
participants rated the valence and arousal of their reaction
to emotional facial expressions and completed a test of
emotion recognition. Individual differences in trait
empathy were also evaluated using the Interpersonal
Reactivity Index (IRI). Results: Accuracy in emotion
recognition was related to the Perspective Taking subscale
of the IRI. Emotion recognition was modulated by motor
activation in a complex pattern, depending on gender and
trait empathy. Conclusions: Motor activity may affect
emotion recognition. This paradigm has the potential of
providing an easy, yet powerful technique to investigate
the long hypothesized causal role of motor resonance in
empathy.
H-28
MAKING SENSE OF OTHERS: THE NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
PERCEIVING
SOCIAL
INTERACTIONS Susanne Quadflieg, NYUAD; Francesco
Gentile, University of Louvain; Bruno Rossion, University of
Louvain - How social expectations shape our perception of
people surrounding us has long been considered a core
issue in vision science. What has not yet attracted
widespread empirical attention, is the question of how
perceivers make sense of others who are not encountered
in isolation. Put differently, whether people shake hands,
take a walk, or have a conversation, they are often
witnessed in each other’s company. At what stage in the

person perception process does sensitivity to such
interactions (and their inherent narrative) arise? To
explore this issue, we used functional magnetic resonance
imaging to measure neural activity while participants
viewed images of two people presented on a uniform
background. The shown agents were either interacting
socially (e.g., involved in a marriage proposal or saying
goodbye to each other) or not interacting. Noninteractions were created by presenting the exact same
agents as in the interaction condition but not facing each
other or by randomly pairing agents facing each other.
Compared to these two control conditions, meaningful
social interactions elicited reduced activity in cortical
areas associated with person perception (e.g., the
posterior temporal sulcus) and person understanding
(e.g., the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex). In line with
neural models of predictive coding facilitating
information processing, these results support the view
that social expectations shape the way our brains make
sense of interacting others not only at an inferential level
but also at a perceptual processing stage. More generally,
these findings begin to elucidate the perception of person
interactions in the human brain.
H-29
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN OBESE VS.
HEALTHY WEIGHT YOUTH William R. Black, University
of Missouri-Kansas City; Rebecca Lepping, University of
Kansas Medical Center; Joshua N. Powell, University of Kansas
Medical Center; Amanda Bruce, University of Missouri-Kansas
City; Cary R. Savage, University of Kansas Medical Center; W.
Kyle Simmons, Laureate Institute for Brain Research Background and Purpose: Rates of pediatric obesity have
nearly tripled in the past few decades (Ogden 2002), and
current estimates suggest that nearly 30% of children in
the United States are obese or overweight (Ogden 2008).
Recently, research has identified brain networks that
might contribute to obesity. Areas in the limbic and
paralimbic system such as ventral striatum, orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC), and hippocampal formation have been
linked to emotional reward processing and medial,
dorsolateral, and inferior prefrontal cortex have been
associated with behavioral control (Del Parigi, 2002; Hare
et al., 2009). Although few studies have evaluated these
networks in obese children compared to healthy weight
children, recent work has demonstrated childhood
obesity-related differences in prefrontal regions related to
cognitive control (i.e. Bruce et al., 2010). The present study
builds on this earlier work by evaluating differences
between obese and healthy weight children in resting
state functional connectivity between prefrontal cortex
and OFC regions previously implicated in reward
processing. Method: Nine healthy weight (Mage = 12.33
years; SD = 1.41; BMI < 85%ile) and nine obese youth
(Mage = 11.67 years; SD = .87; BMI > 95%ile) were
scanned after fasting for at least four hours. Resting state
data were collected after two task-based functional scans
in which children viewed food and non-food advertising
logos. Region of interest analyses were conducted using
AFNI, and 2mm diameter seed regions were placed in
bilateral middle frontal gyrus (BA10) (42, 44, -5; -42, 44, 5). Seed regions were selected as areas showing

differential activity between obese and healthy weight
children in the logo-viewing task (Bruce et al., in press).
We next conducted between-groups comparisons of
functional connectivity between the seed regions and two
regions of interest (ROIs) previously implicated in the
representation of reward: the medial and lateral OFC.
Voxel-wise analyses were conducted within the anatomic
masks, and multiple comparisons were corrected
individually using small volume cluster correction.
Results: Obese children exhibited greater functional
connectivity compared to healthy weight children
between the left middle frontal gyrus seed and the left
medial OFC (7, -21, -14; 288 voxels; t = -5.03), as well as
the left lateral OFC (31, -33, -4; 95 voxels; t = -5.44).
Discussion: These findings demonstrate that obese
children exhibit greater task-independent functional
connectivity between reward/motivation regions (OFC)
and cognitive/self-control regions (PFC), a finding that
accords well with earlier work demonstrating that activity
in OFC when viewing food stimuli is positively correlated
with BMI in adolescents (Yokum, Ng, & Stice, 2011). The
present findings were identified while children were not
actively involved in a task, which may indicate that obese
children are more sensitive to rewarding stimuli such as
food than healthy weight children, and may be more
hedonically driven in general than healthy weight
children. These networks should be further evaluated in
larger samples of obese and lean adolescents, and in
children of different ages.
H-30
THE
BRAIN’S
VIRTUOUS
CYCLE:
AN
INVESTIGATION OF GRATITUDE AND ETHICAL
HUMAN CONDUCT Glenn R. Fox, David Herman, Bosco
Tjan, Hanna Damasio, Antonio Damasio; Brain and Creativity
Institute, Dana and Dornsife Cognitive Neuroscience Imaging
Center, University of Southern California - When we are the
beneficiaries of good human conduct, we experience a
concert of positive emotions ranging from relief to elation.
These emotions can in turn motivate us to expend great
sums of energy to reward those near the source of the
good conduct, creating, quite literally, a virtuous cycle. If
this cycle has a fuel or catalyst, it goes by the name of
gratitude. As a topic of philosophical inquiry, gratitude
has received volumes of attention, but empirical studies
of gratitude are notably rare; gratitude’s neural and
physiological correlates are only just beginning to be
investigated. In this study, we investigate the neural
correlates of gratitude using an interdisciplinary method.
We use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
combined with a powerful resource: testimony from
survivors of the Holocaust, housed in the Shoah
Foundation Institute’s Visual History Archive at the
University of Southern California. The archive is
comprised of over 50,000 videotaped testimonials from
survivors of the Holocaust. We have watched hundreds of
these testimonies, from which we have compiled a
collection of scenarios in which the survivor receives a
gift. In the experiment, participants read these scenarios
while we perform fMRI. For each scenario, participants
take the perspective of the survivor as they read the story
and imagine themselves as the recipient of the gift. The

gifts vary by nature. Some are based on stories where the
survivor receives an insignificant gift, whereas other
stories involve gifts that are lifesaving. For each gift, the
participants rate how much gratitude they felt for the gift,
along with how much effort it took to provide the gift and
how much they needed the gift. These ratings are used to
classify the gifts into separate conditions. We also use
multiple regression analyses to correlate these ratings to
each participant’s brain activity. The participants report
that the experience of going through the experiment
changed how they view the Holocaust, and that they have
a deeper empathy for the tragedy. Insofar as brain
activity patterns, we hypothesized that gifts eliciting high
levels of gratitude will be marked by increased activity in
reward regions, such as the nucleus accumbens and the
ventral medial prefrontal cortex, as well as regions
associated with social bonding and joy, such as the subgenual cingulate cortex. Gifts that do not elicit gratitude,
or elicit lower levels of gratitude, will elicit activity in a
mix of regions associated with perspective taking, such as
the temporoparietal junction and the posteromedial
cortex, and regions associated with physical pain, such as
the somatosensory cortex and the anterior cingulate
cortex. Thus far, the study has revealed preliminary data
in line with our predictions. The concert of brain activity
accompanying the feeling of gratitude encompasses areas
of the brain known for feeling happiness and
interpersonal bonding. Gifts that elicit low levels of
gratitude are marked by activity in regions of the
somatosensory cortex associated with the experience of
physical pain. Taken in sum, these findings form the
neural underpinnings of gratitude and ethical human
conduct.
H-31
RESTING CORTISOL AFFECTS THE RELATION
BETWEEN ATTENTION AT ENCODING AND
ACTIVATION DURING EMOTIONAL MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Kelly A. Bennion, Boston College; Jessica D.
Payne, University of Notre Dame; Katherine R. Mickley
Steinmetz, Wofford College; Elizabeth A. Kensinger, Boston
College - Introduction: While many studies have shown
that high levels of cortisol and/or stress during learning
have an enhancing effect on emotional memory, others
have found an impairing effect. In attempting to reconcile
these discrepant findings, we have shown that cortisol
affects not only attention at encoding and consolidation,
separately, but also the relation between the two. Resting
cortisol enhanced the relation between how long subjects
looked at negative objects during encoding and their
subsequent retention (Bennion et al., under review).
Interestingly, this occurred only when subjects slept
during the consolidation interval, suggesting that
elevated cortisol may ‘tag’ attended information as
important to remember, enabling sleep-dependent
consolidation processes to solidify that salient
information in memory. Here we investigated the neural
correlates behind this finding, focusing on cortisol’s
influence on the relation between attention at encoding
and activation during emotional memory retrieval, asking
whether it differs if one sleeps versus remains awake
during the encoding-retrieval delay. Methods: To assess

cortisol, subjects gave a saliva sample before viewing 124
negative and neutral objects within scenes, either in the
morning or evening. To measure overt attention, subjects’
eye gaze was tracked during encoding. To manipulate
consolidation-phase processes, subjects either remained
awake or slept (to optimize consolidation) during a 12hour retention interval before recognition testing during
fMRI.
Results: Neural activity during retrieval of
subsequently remembered negative objects was analyzed,
examining the effect of subjects’ cortisol levels when
entered as a regressor. For those who slept during the
consolidation interval, those with higher cortisol showed
a stronger relation between looking time at encoding and
successful retrieval-related activity in regions implicated
in emotion processing, including the amygdala and
vmPFC. For those who remained awake during the
consolidation interval, this activity in the emotional
network was not present; rather, those with higher
cortisol showed a stronger relation between looking time
at encoding and hippocampal activity during retrieval.
Discussion: After a period of sleep, increased cortisol at
encoding leads to a stronger relation between looking
time at encoding and amygdala and vmPFC activity at
retrieval, while following a waking delay, increased
cortisol leads to a stronger relation between looking time
and hippocampal activity during retrieval. The absence of
hippocampal activity for the Sleep group is consistent
with prior work showing that memories, initially
dependent on the hippocampus, often transition to the
neocortex during sleep-dependent consolidation. These
results parallel behavioral findings from our lab, further
supporting a modulating role of endogenous cortisol on
the interaction between attention at encoding and
emotional memory consolidation. In the present work,
fMRI during retrieval has elucidated the mechanisms
behind this finding, such that an interaction between
sleep and cortisol is necessary for longer looking times to
track with activity in emotional memory regions during
successful retrieval. Because higher cortisol at encoding
was also correlated with better negative object memory,
again only for the Sleep group, this interaction between
cortisol and sleep within the emotional memory network
may enhance emotional memory consolidation.
H-32
EXPLAINING BEHAVIOR: PERSON PERCEPTION
AND BIOLOGICAL MOTION BRAIN NETWORK
DIFFERENCES DURING HELPFUL AND HARMFUL
ACTIONS FROM HUMAN AND NON-HUMAN
AGENTS Beatrice H. Capestany, Lasana T. Harris; Duke
University - People can quickly extract intentional and
causal attributions for actions and behaviors originating
from human (Fiske & Taylor, 1991, 2007) and non-human
agents (Heider & Simmel, 1944) using mental state
inference processes. The brain has adapted systems to
support these inference processes, recognizing whether
agents are animate (Blake & Shiffrar, 2007) so that we can
determine the originator of action. This allows people to
explain and predict the behaviors of an agent. Here, we
assess the extent to which people use the same language
to explain the behavior of human and non-human agents,
and the extent to which person perception and biological

motion brain networks respond to animate action from a
variety of human and non-human agents. While in the
fMRI scanner, participants explained non-random,
“meaningful” motion in a series of animated video clips
showing three different human and non-human agents
(greebles, shapes, human faces) engaging in matched
helpful or harmful actions (Heider & Simmel, 1944).
Results demonstrate remarkable similarities in the use of
mental state inferences across the three different agents.
Moreover, brain systems implicated in biological-motion
detection and person perception were differentially
engaged depending on the type of agent (human, nonhuman) and valence of behavior (helpful, harmful).
Specifically, mental state inferences during harmful
behavior drive activations in both systems, particularly
when involving human agents. This dissociates the
influence of brain networks engaged in social cognition
beyond self-report behavior, hinting at categories of
stimuli and behaviors that maximally drive these brain
systems consistent with evolutionary theories about
human behavior.
H-33
A NEURO-COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF GUILT
Luke J Chang, University of Colorado; Alec Smith, California
Institute of Technology; Martin Dufwenberg, University of
Arizona; Tor D. Wager, University of Colorado; Alan G
Sanfey, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior at
Radboud University - Emotions can be considered
motivational states resulting from a combination of
cognitive appraisals and physiological processes that act
to influence behavior. Social emotions are particularly
important for shaping social interactions, but are difficult
to study from a neuroscientific perspective using animal
models or standard affective imaging paradigms. In this
study, we offer a novel approach to studying the
experience of an emotion by combining a computational
model of guilt with a real social interaction. Participants
played as the second player in a single shot trust game
while undergoing fMRI. After deciding how much
money to return, participants were handed down their
partner’s actual expectations. Our formal model of guilt,
which posited that people would experience more guilt if
they returned less than their partner expected,
successfully predicted participant’s subjective ratings of
guilt.
A machine-learning algorithm identified a
multivariate pattern of voxels that predicted our
computational model of guilt using leave one subject out
cross-validation. The results indicate that disappointing a
relationship partner was associated with decreased
activity in the ventral striatum and increased activity in
the amygdala, insula, and anterior cingulate cortex. This
pattern of results was also found when the algorithm was
trained to predict guilt ratings, suggesting that our model
was successfully capturing the experience of guilt. These
results are consistent with the notion of guilt being a
negative affective experience resulting from a negative
social prediction error and demonstrate how the neural
processes associated with an affective state can be
uncovered using a computational approach.

H-34 *SANS Poster Award Winner
DELAYING GRATIFICATION DEPENDS ON SOCIAL
TRUST Laura Michaelson, University of Colorado Boulder;
Alejandro de la Vega, University of Colorado Boulder;
Christopher H. Chatham, Brown University; Yuko Munakata,
University of Colorado Boulder - Delaying gratification is
hard, yet crucial to individual and societal success.
Prominent accounts of delaying gratification focus on
sensitivity to reward magnitudes, relative to delay
durations, and associated neural mechanisms in the
nucleus accumbens, cingulate cortex, and prefrontal
cortical regions (e.g., Ballard & Knutson, 2009). However,
social trust may also play a central role. That is, delaying
gratification may only make sense in a trustworthy social
context, where individuals are confident that they will
actually receive the delayed reward in the future if they
opt to wait for it. Despite rapidly growing literature
related to mechanisms of delaying gratification, social
factors remain relatively unexplored. Limited evidence is
consistent with a role of trust (e.g., Kidd, Palmeri, &
Aslin, 2013; Mahrer, 1956), but could alternatively be
interpreted in terms of other known factors, such as selfcontrol, or more general reward effects. Thus, the trust
factor may be of broad theoretical relevance, both for
cognitive and neural frameworks.
The present work
tests whether social trust, manipulated in the absence of
reward, influences choices about whether to delay
gratification. Two studies were conducted in an online
survey format, via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, a website
that allows users to complete small tasks for pay. Trust
was manipulated using vignettes about fictional
characters (Experiment 1, N = 18) and accompanying
faces that varied in perceived trustworthiness
(Experiment 2, N = 113). Delay of gratification was
assessed using intertemporal choice questions, in which
participants were asked if they would prefer a smaller,
immediate reward or a larger, delayed reward from the
character they read about.
Across both experiments,
trust influenced participants’ willingness to delay
gratification.
In Experiment 1, where trust was
manipulated within subjects, participants were less likely
to delay gratification in the untrustworthy condition,
relative to the trustworthy and neutral conditions, b = .38,
SE = .04, z = 7.812, p < .0001. Ratings of perceived
trustworthiness suggested our trust manipulation was
effective, t(58)= 4.89, p < .0001, and trustworthiness
ratings also predicted probability of delaying, b = .37, SE
= 0.05, z = 7.65, p < 0.0001. Similarly, in Experiment 2,
where trust was manipulated between subjects,
participants’ preferences for delayed rewards (as indexed
by k) were significantly lower in the untrustworthy
context, relative to the trustworthy and neutral contexts,
t(111) = -3.62, p < .001).
Ratings of perceived
trustworthiness again varied by condition, t(105) = 4.29, p
< .0001, Cohen’s d = 0.8, and perceived trustworthiness
predicted k-values, t(111) = -2.49, p < .05, such that greater
trustworthiness predicted greater delay of gratification.
These results demonstrate an important and surprisingly
overlooked role of social trust in delaying gratification.
Social factors are largely absent from the burgeoning
literature on neural mechanisms supporting delay of
gratification; thus, such findings highlight the need to

revise prominent theories to incorporate the role of trust.
Testing such possibilities for the role of trust, and
investigating how trust and other social factors interact
with established neural mechanisms, may greatly
advance our understanding of the fundamental ability to
delay gratification.
H-35
HOW TEMPERAMENT INFLUENCES HUMOR
APPRECIATION IN CHILDREN Pascal Vrticka, Stanford
University; Michelle Neely, Stanford University; Elizabeth
Walter, Stanford University; Jessica M. Black, Stanford
University, Boston College; Allan L. Reiss, Stanford University
- Emerging evidence from functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) studies suggest that humor appreciation
is a specific and well-differentiated higher-order human
cognitive function. Humor mainly involves the resolution
of conflict or incongruity through juxtaposition of mental
states, and a positive feeling state related to mirth and/or
reward. Because such patterns have not only been
observed in adults but also in young children, humor
appreciation appears to already be operational at early
developmental stages.
In order to further our
understanding of the development of humor
appreciation, this fMRI study focused on elucidating the
association between child temperament and patterns of
neural processing of humorous movie clips in 22 children
aged 6 to 13. Temperament was chosen because it refers to
personality traits that appear early during ontogenesis,
display moderate stability, and involve distinctive
biological manifestations. Here, temperament was
assessed with the Emotionality Activity Sociability (EAS)
questionnaire completed by the children’s parents, which
included a Shyness subscale. Data were controlled for age
and IQ. Our results revealed that activation for humor
appreciation was diminished in anterior superior
temporal gyrus and midbrain in children scoring high on
shyness, a temperament feature thought to reflect
inhibition to the unfamiliar as well as feelings of tension
and distress during social interactions (comparable to
behavioral inhibition / fear in adults). In turn, humor
appreciation was increased in bilateral superior temporal
gyrus / temporo-occipital junction and midbrain in
children with high (negative) emotionality scores, a trait
that is usually associated with a general negative mood
state and greater intensity of emotional reactions
(comparable to neuroticism in adults). Such findings are
of potential clinical relevance, because intra- as well as
inter-individual variation in brain response to humor may
serve as a biomarker of risk for particular
psychological/psychiatric disturbances.
H-36
INCREASED
REWARD-RELATED
NEURAL
ACTIVITY
TO
SOCIAL
IMAGES
PREDICTS
EVERYDAY SOCIAL BEHAVIORS Katherine E. Powers,
Dartmouth College; Richard B. Lopez, Dartmouth College;
Wilhelm Hofmann, University of Chicago; William M. Kelley,
Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton, Dartmouth College Previous research has demonstrated that individual
differences in reward-related neural activity can predict

real world behavioral outcomes. For example, prior
research in our laboratory found that activity in the
ventral striatum to food and sexual images predicted
weight gain and sexual behavior over six months,
respectively. Here, we sought to determine whether a
similar neural mechanism might extend to social
behavior.
Specifically, we
combined
functional
neuroimaging and experience sampling technology to
examine whether reward-related neural activity in
response to social images predicted the frequency of daily
social behavior. During fMRI scanning, participants (N =
31) viewed a series of images of people, food items, and
nature scenes in a standard cue-reactivity paradigm. The
fMRI session was followed by an intensive week-long
experience sampling period in which participants carried
mobile devices and reported on a variety of social
behaviors and situational factors, including their present
location. This allowed us to determine whether
individuals tended to spend more time in social situations
(e.g., a fraternity) or nonsocial situations (e.g., one’s own
dorm room). Individuals showing higher activity in the
ventral striatum and medial orbitofrontal cortex, regions
reliably implicated in reward processing, when viewing
positive social images spent more time in social settings
on a daily basis. These findings show that heightened
reward-related activity to social images predicts daily
social life, and implicate specific brain regions in
motivating day-to-day social behavior.
H-37 *SANS Poster Award Winner
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY DURING COGNITIVE EMOTION
REGULATION Eric S. Allard, Elizabeth A. Kensinger;
Boston College - Successful emotion regulation partly
depends on our capacity to modulate emotional responses
through the use of cognitive strategies. Older age is
sometimes associated with enhanced emotion regulation
ability; however, age differences in the successful
implementation of cognitive regulatory strategies is
mixed. The current study examined age differences in
neural activation patterns when cognitively regulating
negative affect via two strategies: selective attention and
reappraisal. We used psychophysiological interaction
analyses to examine functional connectivity with a region
of rostral ACC showing an age-related reversal in activity
in response to the two regulation conditions: greater
activity during selective attention for younger adults and
reappraisal for older adults. Functional connectivity with
this region was more robust for reappraisal relative to
selective attention for both age groups. Younger adults
demonstrated functional coupling of rostral ACC and
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) while older adults
demonstrated a more distributed network of activation
that covaried with rostral ACC in posterior parietal
regions and lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC). We discuss
our results in terms of how functional connectivity
analysis help offer additional insight into our
understanding of age differences in the successful
implementation of cognitive emotion regulation
strategies.

H-38
CUTENESS AFFECTS EMOTIONAL RESPONSES
Jessika Golle, Fred W. Mast, Janek, S. Lobmaier; University of
Bern - Infants are among the most fragile, endearing, and
valuable beings. They need protection and care.
According to Konrad Lorenz, the Kindchenschema
functions as an innate releasing mechanism that triggers
care-taking behavior (Lorenz, 1947). The Kindchenschema
is described by specific features that characterize infants
such as large eyes, a high forehead, and relatively short
and thick extremities. Previous studies found that infants
that conform to the Kindchenschema are perceived cuter
(e.g. Sternglanz et al., 1977) and evoke more affectionate
interactions with their mothers compared to less cute
infants (Langlois et al., 1995). In the current study we
explored possible neurobiological underpinnings of the
preference for cute infant faces. Particularly, we assumed
that very cute infant faces elicit stronger emotional
responses than less cute faces and neutral stimuli. We
used pupil size and skin admittance responses as
indicators of emotional arousal and facial muscle activity
(corrugator supercili, zygomaticus major) as indicator for
emotional valence. We recorded psychophysiological data
of 60 participants (30 male, 30 female) while they were
passively viewing 20 very cute and 20 medium cute infant
faces, as well as 20 neutral objects (sugar pots). In
addition, all participants evaluated the cuteness of each
presented infant face and filled out an empathy
questionnaire. We found stronger positive emotional
reactions towards cute infant faces compared to less cute
faces and neutral stimuli. Our results highlight the impact
of facial cuteness on the activity of the autonomous
nervous system, and suggest that stronger reactions
contribute to the preference of cute infants and more
affectionate interactions with them.
H-39
PERSON ATTRIBUTIONS UNDER STRESS Jennifer
Kubota, New York University; Rachel Mojdehbakhsh, New
York University; Candace Raio, New York University; Tobias
Brosch, University of Geneva; Jim S. Uleman, New York
University; Elizabeth Phelps, New York University - When
determining the cause of a person’s behavior, perceivers
often emphasize dispositional explanations and minimize
situational explanations, an error known as the
Fundamental Attribution Error (FAE). The FAE occurs in
part because dispositional explanations are relatively
automatic, whereas considering the situation requires
additional cognitive effort. This model is supported by a
recent brain imaging study, finding increases in
dorsolateral prefrontal activity (DLPFC), a region linked
to cognitive control, when individuals make situational
attributions (Brosch et al., in press). If incorporating
situational information requires DLPFC-related cognitive
control, manipulations that have been shown to impair
DLPFC function should result in more dispositional
attributions. Acute stress impairs prefrontal cortical
functioning and negatively affects cognitive control. To
explore the effects of stress on attributions, participants
were physiologically stressed or not before completing an
attribution task and cortisol samples were collected

throughout. Compared to individuals under no stress, we
found that stress resulted in increased cortisol and
exacerbated the FAE so that individuals made more
dispositional than situational attributions. These findings
imply that individuals are more likely to commit the FAE
when stressed.
H-40
NEUROENDOCRINE
AND
INTERGROUP
DYNAMICS IN THE 2012 US PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION Pranjal H. Mehta, Smrithi Prasad, Bethany
Lassetter; University of Oregon - Testosterone and cortisol
levels fluctuate when individuals compete for status in
dominance contests. However there is little known about
hormonal, psychological and behavioral changes in largescale societal dominance contests. To address this gap in
the literature, we tracked these changes in voters’ during
the weeks surrounding one such societal contest i.e. the
2012 US Presidential Election. 114 participants consisting
of 55% Obama supporters, 29% Romney supporters and
16% undecided voters (2-3 weeks prior to the election)
were recruited. The study consisted of a five-day
naturalistic sampling period where the baseline and
diurnal patterns of testosterone and cortisol were
measured. Behavioral and attitudinal measures of the
participants’ political affiliation and inter-group
behaviors were tracked using a daily diary and evening
surveys. Our statistical analyses focus around two broad
goals: (1) identify psychological moderators (e.g., ingroup identification) of testosterone and cortisol changes
before, during and after the election; (2) examine the
consequences of election-related testosterone and cortisol
changes for intergroup behaviors, such as out-group
derogation (e.g., Romney supporters expressing negative
sentiments toward Obama supporters/Democrats) and
in-group favoritism (e.g. Romney supporters praising
other Romney supporters/Republicans).
This study
takes a novel social endocrinology approach to study a
societal-level dominance contest. The findings have
theoretical implications for our understanding of groupbased status hierarchies and how social and biological
factors shape the political process.
H-41
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES IN SENSORY REACTIVITY AND
ASPECTS OF SOCIAL COGNITION Jillian Sullivan,
Darci Nielsen, Sarah Schoen, Lucy Miller; Sensory Processing
Disorder Foundation - The role of sensory processing in of
social cognition is often overlooked but a shaping of the
brain by environmental stimuli is fundamental to
development. There is some suggestion that increased
sensory reactivity may lead to greater social deficits, but
findings from other disciplines have highlighted an
enhancing effect of increased physiological or behavioral
reactivity on social cognition. This study aimed to
investigate the relationship between increased sensory
reactivity and several aspects of social cognition and
behavior in a sample of typically developing adults.
Eighty-one adults (21 male and 60 females, aged 19-80
years) completed the Sensory Over-Reactivity inventory,

the Reading the Mind in the Eyes (RMiE) performance
task, the Empathy Quotient (EQ), and the Prosocial
Personality Battery (PPB) online. Although there was no
association between sensory reactivity and the EQ or PPB
scales, there was a significant positive correlation with
performance on the RMiE task (rho(75)=0.42). Gender
differences may have occluded any significant correlation
between sensory reactivity and the EQ and PPB scales
however. Increased sensory reactivity promoted emotion
recognition performance, but there was little association
between sensory reactivity and self-reported indices of
social abilities or prosocial behavior. Results are discussed
with reference to differences between social cognition
aspects and the theoretical and neurological ramifications
of these relationships.
H-42
GAMBLING, DISCOUNTING, AND TEMPORAL
PERSPECTIVE
REVEAL
DISSOCIATIONS
IN
FUTURE THINKING IN EPISODIC AMNESIC
INDIVIDUALS Donna Kwan, York University; Carl F.
Craver, Washington University; Leonard Green, Washington
University; Joel Myerson, Washington University; R. Shayna
Rosenbaum, York University, Rotman Research Institute Neuroimaging studies show that imagining future
experiences, like recollecting past experiences, activates a
set of brain regions including medial temporal lobe
structures, in particular the hippocampus. Moreover,
compromised hippocampal function causes episodic
amnesia (impairment in the ability to recollect past
experiences), which is associated with impairment in the
ability to imagine future experiences. For example, one
individual with extensive medial temporal lobe damage
and resulting episodic amnesia described his state of
mind as “blank” when asked to imagine any future
experiences (Tulving, 1985).
Nevertheless, the same
individual was able to make future-oriented financial
decisions: When offered a small, immediate monetary
reward and a larger, delayed monetary reward, he
forwent the former in favour of the latter (Kwan et al.,
2012).
These findings suggest that future-oriented
thinking is not a unitary construct, and that some forms of
future thinking do not require hippocampally mediated
future imagining. The present study extends our analysis
of the forms of decision making and future thinking in
individuals with extensive medial temporal lobe damage,
who (along with matched controls) completed the
following measures: an adapted version of the
Autobiographical Interview to establish baselines of past
recollection and future imagination; a Probabilistic
Discounting task to assess tendencies toward high-risk
gambling; a Delay Discounting task to assess economic
decision making as a function of time delay; and the
Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory to assess personal
orientation toward the past, present, and future
(Zimbardo & Boyd, 1999).
Individuals with medial
temporal damage all showed varying degrees of deficits
in recollecting past experiences and imagining future
experiences, depending on the nature and extent of the
damage, but comparisons with matched controls
indicated that other aspects of temporal thought and
future-oriented decision making were preserved.

Individuals with medial temporal damage did not show a
predilection toward high-risk betting on the Probability
Discounting task. On the Delay Discounting task,
individuals with medial temporal damage chose larger
future rewards over smaller immediate rewards and, as in
the healthy controls, the degree of discounting decreased
as a function of delay. Despite impairments in past
recollection and future imagining, ZTPI results showed
that the individuals with medial temporal damage had
personal orientations toward time that were either biased
toward the past or future, but were not bound to the
present. This pattern of findings suggests that there are
multiple forms of future thinking involving distinct
processes that may have evolved for different purposes.
These processes are differentially vulnerable to medial
temporal lobe damage disruption and its effects on the
ability to imagine oneself in the future. We conclude that
even extensive medial temporal damage and the resulting
episodic amnesia do not preclude prudent decision
making, including consideration of future financial
outcomes, or personal identification with the past and
future.
H-43
BRAIN REGIONS FOR THEORY OF MIND
DISTINGUISH BETWEEN COOPERATIVE AND
COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS IN A “ROCK,
PAPER, SCISSORS” GAME Lily Tsoi, James Dungan,
Liane Young; Boston College - Previous work on group
membership reveals that we often attribute less mind to
those outside our group - i.e., outgroup dehumanization.
By contrast, we robustly attribute mental states to close
others - i.e., ingroup affiliation. We suggest that while
some aspects of theory of mind (ToM) are necessary for
cooperation, other aspects may be essential for strategic,
competitive interactions. Using functional resonance
imaging (fMRI), we investigated whether brain regions
for ToM, localized using an independent task, are
differentially recruited for competitive versus cooperative
interactions and whether this dimension (competitive
versus cooperative) is encoded in the spatial pattern of
activity across voxels within ToM regions. Participants
played a game variant of “Rock, Paper, Scissors” with one
other player (actually the computer); players chose
between two shapes (circle, square). Every time
participants met the trial-specific goal, they won $1. In
“cooperate” trials, each participant was instructed to
work with the other player toward the same goal (e.g., to
guess the same shape or match the other player); both
players won $1 or not, together, depending on whether
they met their shared goal. In “compete” trials, players
had opposite goals (e.g., if one player was told to match
the other player, the other player was told to mismatch or
guess the opposite shape); only one player could win $1.
In control conditions, a random shape (circle, square) was
generated and, depending on the shape, either both
players would win or lose (mimicking “cooperate” trials),
or only one player would win (mimicking “compete”
trials). First, region of interest (ROI) analyses revealed
greater activation for compete and cooperate trials over
control trials in these ToM regions: precuneus,
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), and right

temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ). Second, distinct
patterns emerged across ROIs when comparing
competitive and cooperative interactions: greater
precuneus activity for competitive trials, greater DMPFC
activity for cooperative trials, and equally robust activity
in RTPJ. Third, multi-voxel pattern analyses (MVPA)
revealed that all three regions, including RTPJ, encode
whether an interaction is cooperative or competitive.
These results suggest that competitive versus cooperative
interactions engage different components of ToM with
distinct neural substrates.
H-44
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WHITE MATTER
INTEGRITY AND EMOTIONAL PROCESSING IN
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Binder, A., Genova, H.,
Lengenfelder, J., Sacchetti, D.L., Chiaravalloti, N.D.; Kessler
Foundation Research Center - Introduction: Although there
is a significant body of research addressing the cognitive
impairments in individuals with traumatic brain injury
(TBI), deficits in emotional processing remain overlooked
and understudied in this population.
However,
impairments in emotional processing can negatively
impact both daily functioning and social functioning in
this population and severely affect quality of life. The
purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship
between white matter integrity and facial emotional
processing ability in individuals with TBI. Methods:
Within a sample of 16 participants, including 7 TBI and 9
healthy controls (HC), we examined the relationship
between fractional anisotropy (FA), as assessed by
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), and performance on the
facial emotion recognition task (FERT). The FERT requires
participants to identify one of six basic emotions from
facial expressions presented in a computer paradigm. We
performed a regression analysis to look at the relationship
between FA and FERT performance, while controlling for
age. Results: The TBI group performed significantly
worse than HCs on the FERT. We found a significant
positive relationship between white matter integrity in the
Inferior Longitudinal Fasciculus (ILF) and performance
on the FERT task suggesting that people with lower FA
(indicating increased damage) had lower accuracy.
Discussion: The relationship between white matter
integrity and facial emotion recognition indicates a
disruption in neural networks involving the ILF. This
disruption may play a role in the emotional processing
deficits often observed in individuals with TBI. Although
the function of the ILF is not fully known, it has
previously been implicated as a direct pathway between
the occipital and anterior temporal regions to strengthen
the visual processing of emotional stimuli. Future
research should focus on examining these neural
pathways to address emotional processing issues in TBI.
H-45
CULTURAL EXPERIENCES REDUCE RACIAL BIAS
IN NEURAL RESPONSES TO OTHERS\' SUFFERING
Shihui Han, Xiangyu Zuo; Peking University - Our previous
neuroimaging research found that adults showed
significantly increased neural activity to perceived pain in

same-race but not other-race individuals. Moreover,
manipulations in cognitive strategy and intergroup
relationship in laboratory can significantly reduce the
racial bias in empathic neural response by increasing
neural activity to perceived pain in other-race others. The
current study further examined whether real-life cultural
experiences with other-race individuals can reduce the
racial bias in empathic neural responses to others\'
suffering. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), we scanned 20 Chinese adults who were brought
up in Western countries (the United States, the United
Kingdom, and Canada) where Caucasians are the
majority of the population. Participants viewed video
clips in which either Asian or Caucasian models received
painful or neutral stimulation. We found that the neural
activity in the pain matrix including the anterior cingulate
cortex, anterior insula, inferior frontal cortex and
somatosensory cortex was significantly increased in
response to painful vs. neutral stimuli applied to both
Asian and Caucasian models. Moreover, these empathic
neural responses to Asian and Caucasian models did not
differ significantly and were positively correlated with
each other. Our results indicate that cultural experiences
with racial out-group members can increase the neural
responses to the suffering of other-race individuals and
thus reduce the racial bias in empathy.
H-46
TO CROSS OR NOT TO CROSS: MONITORING
DECISIONS
BASED
ON
EVERYDAY
LIFE
EXPERIENCE IN A SIMULATED TRAFFIC TASK
Evelien Kostermans, Radboud University Nijmegen; Renske
Spijkerman, Radboud University Nijmegen; Rutger C.M.E
Engels, Radboud University Nijmegen; Harold Bekkering;
Radboud University Nijmegen; Ellen R. A. de Bruijn, Radboud
University Nijmegen, Leiden University - Different
theoretical accounts have attempted to integrate ACC
involvement in relation to conflict detection, errorlikelihood predictions and error monitoring. Regarding
the latter, ERP studies have identified the Feedback
Related Negativity (FRN) component in relation to
processing feedback which indicates that a particular
outcome was worse than expected. In addition, according
to the conflict-monitoring theory the stimulus-locked N2
reflects pre-response conflict. Although formulated
around different principles, these theories share the
notion that both conflict and error-signals function as a
warning signal to improve behavior. Assumptions of
these theories have been made on the basis of relatively
simple response-mapping tasks, rather than more
complex decision-making processes associated with
everyday situations. The question remains whether
expectancies and conflicts induced by everyday
knowledge similarly affect decision-making processes. To
answer this question, participants in the current study
had to engage in a simulated traffic task that varied high
and low ambiguous situations at an intersection by
presenting multiple varying traffic light combinations.
The tendency to cross was more pronounced for traffic
light combinations that in real-life are associated with
proceeding, as opposed to more ambiguous traffic light
combinations not uniquely associated with a specific

response. On a neurophysiological level, the stimuluslocked N2 was enhanced on trials that induced
experience-based conflict. In contrast, the FRN component
was not differentially influenced by everyday
expectancies in relation to traffic rules. The current study
shows that well-learned everyday rules may influence
decision-making processes in situations that are
associated with the application of these rules, even if
responding accordingly does not lead to the intended
outcomes.
H-47
INTEROCEPTIVE
SENSIBILITY
PREDICTS
SENSIBILITY TO OTHER’S EMOTION Yuri Terasawa,
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, National Center of
Neurology and Psychiatry; Yoshiya Moriguchi, National
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Integrative Brain Imaging
Center; Saiko Tochizawa, Keio University; Riko Sato, Keio
University; Satoshi Umeda, Keio University - Objective: The
peripheral theory of emotion suggests that subjective
experience of emotion and interoception are essentially
related. Some previous studies showed that the
interoceptive sensibility predicts emotional sensibility and
anxiety traits. In fact, we reported that the interoceptive
sensibility and social anxiety trait are mediated by the
anterior insular cortex (Terasawa et al., 2012, Soc. Cogn.
Affect. Neurosci.) and suggested that the level of attention
to interoceptive information can impact on subjective
feelings of anxiety. In this study, we examined whether
the interoceptive sensibility modulates emotional
experience in social context, using with facial expressions.
Methods: Thirty graduate and undergraduate students
participated our study (13 males, 17 females, mean
age=21.4¬±1.8). The interoceptive sensibility was
measured by the heartbeat detection task. In this task,
participants were required to report number of heartbeats
that they could feel over a period of time. Actual
heartbeats were measured by pulsoxymater. Interoceptive
sensibility was evaluated by the levels of dissociation
between reported and actual heartbeats (interoception
error rate). We selected 5 types of facial expression
photos; those were happy, sadness, disgust, anger and
neutral. We made morphed continua photos between
neutral and each facial expression. We prepared eight
steps between neutral-100% and each emotion 100%. Each
stimulus was presented in random order and participants
judged whether they can feel any emotion from the
stimulus or not, and chose the most appropriate emotion
when they judged the stimulus have emotional valence.
There were 200 trials in total. Individual’s threshold to
feel the emotion were obtained from their responses
against the facial expression photos. Participants
completed some questionnaires those were Manifest
Anxiety Scale (MAS), Social Anxiety Disorder Scale
(SADS), The 20-item Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20)
and The Modified Somatic Perception Questionnaire
(MSPQ).
Results & Discussion: The stepwise multiple
regression analyses on the thresholds to feel the emotion
were conducted. Scores of SADS, TAS-20, MAS, resting
heart rate and interoception error rate were entered the
analyses as candidates of independent variable. The
analysis revealed that only the interoception error rate

predicts the thresholds to feel happiness and sadness. On
the other hand, the error response rate for the sad stimuli
predicted scores of SADS.
The results imply that
individuals who are sensitive to their own interoceptive
information are also sensitive to emotions presented in
facial expressions. The results suggest that interoceptive
awareness modulates intensity of subjective experience of
emotion and affects individual traits concerned with
emotion processing.
H-48
UNDERSTANDING LANGUAGE FROM WITHIN:
DIFFERENTIAL INVOLVEMENT OF PERIGENUAL
CINGULATE,
VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL
CORTEX, AND INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS WHEN
PROCESSING SENTENCES DESCRIBING MENTAL
STATES Suzanne Oosterwijk, Northeastern University,
University of Amsterdam; Scott Mackey, University of
California, San Diego; Piotr Winkielman, University of
California, San Diego; Martin P. Paulus, University of
California, San Diego - Language is a common way to
communicate mental states such as anger, fear, doubt or
hunger. Since most mental states are subjectively felt, it is
important to explain how language grounds the internal
quality of mental states. According to embodied cognition
accounts, language and experience share neural systems
for sensory, motor, introspective and bodily states
(Gallese & Lakoff, 2005; Glenberg et al., 2005; Barsalou,
1999, 2008). These accounts predict that these neural
systems engage in multimodal simulations when people
understand linguistic references to mental states.
Although neuroscientific research has demonstrated
action simulation when processing language (e.g.,
Tettamanti et al., 2005); evidence for the simulation of
internal states when processing language is scarce.
Furthermore, little is known about the contextual
flexibility of simulation, even though embodied cognition
accounts predict that mental states are represented by
simulations in different modalities depending on context
or perspective (cf. Wilson-Mendenhall et al., 2011;
Oosterwijk et al., 2012). In the present fMRI study we
examined whether neural regions that are involved in the
representation and generation of internal states engage
when individuals understand sentences that describe
mental states with a focus on internal experiences.
Subjects were presented with sentences describing
emotional (e.g., fear, joy) and non-emotional (e.g., hunger,
thinking) mental states from an internal perspective (i.e.,
focusing on bodily sensations and introspection) or an
external perspective (i.e., focusing on expression and
action). Participants judged whether sentences described
a mental state or not; non-mental states sentences served
as control. We hypothesized that external sentences
would engage prefrontal regions associated with action
representation (e.g., inferior frontal gyrus) and that
internal sentences would engage prefrontal regions
associated with internal experience and bodily sensations
(e.g., insular cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex,
anterior cingulate cortex). Region of interest analyses
show that external emotion and external non-emotion
sentences were associated with greater activation in the
inferior frontal gyrus relative to internal sentences.

Furthermore, internal emotion sentences engaged the
anterior cingulate gyrus and the ventromedial prefrontal
cortex significantly more than all other sentence
categories. A similar pattern was found for the insular
cortex, although a whole brain analysis indicated that
non-emotion sentences engaged the anterior insula to a
larger extent than emotion sentences. Together, these
findings highlight two important points that are
consistent with embodied cognition accounts. First,
processing sentences describing emotional and nonemotional mental states engages neural systems
associated with internal experience and action. Second,
the engagement of these systems varies with perspective,
highlighting the flexibility of simulation when processing
mental states communicated through language.
H-49
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EMPATHY AND
P300 TO HUMAN FACE Damee Choi, Mami Uramoto,
Shigeki Watanuki; Kyushu University - Recent neuroscience
studies have found that people with high self-reported
empathy are more sensitive to social stimuli such as
human faces, rather than people with low self-reported
empathy (Choi & Watanuki, 2012; Jabbi et al., 2007; Singer
et al., 2004). However, it is still unclear whether P300
component of ERP (Event-related Potential) to social
stimuli
are
different
on
individual
empathic
characteristics. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate
the relationship between self-reported empathy and P300
responses to human faces. Twenty-eight participants were
selected through screening with Interpersonal Reactivity
Index
(Davis,
1980),
a
self-reported
empathy
questionnaire, and categorized into high empathy group
and low empathy group. P300 was recorded while both
two groups watched pictures of human face (as social
stimuli) and pictures of flower (as unsocial stimuli) using
oddball paradigm. The results indicated that the high
empathy group showed greater P300 amplitude at
parietal site in response to the pictures of human face. On
the other hand, there were no differences in P300
amplitude induced by pictures of flower between the two
groups. Given that P300 amplitude is thought to reflect
motivational significance of stimuli (Nieuwenhuis et al.,
2005), the findings of this study suggest that people with
high self-reported empathy regard social stimuli as more
valuable information than people with low self-reported
empathy do. In addition, the results indicated that high
empathy group displayed longer P300 latency in response
to pictures of human face rather than pictures of flower,
whereas low empathy group did not. Thus, it may
suggest that people with high empathy are more careful
to classify social stimuli than unsocial stimuli, as latency
of P300 has been reported to be positively correlated with
time taken to stimuli categorization (Donchin, 1979). In
brief, this study showed that P300 amplitude and latency
to social stimuli are affected by self-reported empathy.
Furthermore, the present results may act as a key to
understand how empathy is associated with prosocial
behaviors.

H-50
PIECE OF CAKE: AFFECTIVE REACTIVITY TO AND
COGNITIVE REGULATION OF FOOD CUES Nicole R.
Giuliani, Rebecca D. Calcott, Elliot T. Berkman; University of
Oregon - Recent research on neural processes underlying
eating behavior has focused on reward-related reactivity.
However, a recent “seesaw” model of self-regulation
proposed that failures result from increases in reactivity,
decreases in regulation, or both. In the current study, we
apply this model to the consumption of energy-dense
foods. In the task, subjects were instructed to passively
view healthy or energy-dense foods or engage a process
called reappraisal, where they cognitively altered the
meaning of the food stimuli by, for example, focusing on
the negative consequences of consumption. Behaviorally,
energy-dense foods induced greater self-reported desire
to eat healthy foods, and reappraisal reduced that desire
to a level not significantly different from viewing healthy
foods. There was no relationship between self-report and
ad hoc consumption of energy-dense foods two weeks
later. Neurally, reactivity (look energy-dense > look
healthy) induced activation in the occipital lobe (e.g.,
precuneus, angular gyrus). Reappraisal (regulate energydense > look energy-dense) induced activation in the left
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
and a cluster encompassing bilateral dorsal anterior
cingulate and the pre-supplementary motor area (SMA).
Only reappraisal-related activation of the left IFG and
pre-SMA predicted eating behavior, such that those
individuals who ate a lot activated these regulatory
regions to a greater degree than those who did not eat or
ate very little. These findings support the regulation
seesaw model, and suggest that, while individuals who
consume large quantities of energy-dense foods can selfregulate, they must try harder, thus engaging regulatory
brain regions to a greater degree.
H-51
PERSPECTIVE TAKING ENHANCES ENCODING OF
COUNTER-STEREOTYPICAL INFORMATION AND
SUBSEQUENT PREDICTION ACCURACY FOR OUTGROUP MEMBERS Kelly A. Jordan, Adam Magerman,
Chad Forbes; University of Delaware - Extant research
suggests our brains are designed for one primary
function: prediction. Whether we’re calculating what we
would like most for dinner or what we should say to
facilitate pleasant social interactions, we inherently rely
on past experiences, knowledge and situational cues to
predict what responses will engender successful
navigation through complex social environments. Despite
the fundamental importance of prediction accuracy,
people tend to be quite inept at predicting other’s
behaviors. This is particularly likely when predicting outgroup behaviors, which can be biased by inaccurate,
stereotype-consistent information, associated with outgroup members. To the extent that accurate knowledge
for out-group members can increase prediction accuracy
for out-group behaviors, facilitating efficacious encoding
of counter-stereotypic information may be one means of
increasing prediction accuracy for out-group behaviors.
One way this may be achieved is via perspective taking,

or placing one’s self in another’s shoes and imagining the
world through their eyes. Past research suggests that
perspective taking can be an effective means of promoting
encoding of counter-stereotypic information, likely via
exploiting the well-known self-reference effect, i.e.,
enhanced encoding of self-relevant information. The
present studies examined this question directly by
examining whether perspective taking enhanced
encoding of counter-stereotypical information for outgroup members and subsequently one’s ability to
accurately predict out-group behaviors. In Study 1, White
participants self-identified as either Democrats or
Republicans, viewed photos of political and ethnic
(Latino) in-group or out-group members. These photos
were accompanied by information containing either
stereotypic or counter-stereotypic political viewpoints for
Republicans or Democrats. Participants were instructed to
view and process the information from the perspective of
the person in the photo. Participants were then given a
surprise memory test and were asked to identify the
correct stereotypic or counter-stereotypic information that
was presented for each person. Finally, participants were
presented with the pictures again and were asked to
predict how each person would vote. Results revealed
that when White Republicans engaged in perspective
taking they exhibited enhanced encoding for all outgroup targets (political and ethnic). Conversely, when
White Democrats engaged in perspective taking they
demonstrated enhanced encoding for ethnic and political
in-group members (White Democrat targets) and ethnic
and political out-group members (Latino Republican
targets). Results of the prediction task provided partial
support for hypotheses. White Republican participants
exhibited increased prediction accuracy for Latino
Republican targets to the extent they encoded counterstereotypical information pertinent to their ethnic outgroup. Democrats demonstrated a similar pattern but it
was specific to political and ethnic in-group targets. Study
2 examined the neural correlates underlying these
behaviors and whether memory effects were influenced
by perspective taking specifically. Continuous EEG
activity was recorded while White participants completed
a memory and prediction task. Participants viewed the
information from either the perspective of out-group
members or objectively. Results revealed interesting
interactions between brain regions important for person
perception.
Together these findings indicate that
perspective taking is an effective strategy for enhancing
memory for counter-stereotypic information and
prediction accuracy for out-group members, possibly via
promoting interactions between neural regions integral
for person perception.
H-52
READING PARENTS’ MINDS: ADOLESCENTS’
MENTALIZING SKILL AND FAMILY CONFLICT
HISTORY MODERATE NEURAL ACTIVATION TO
PARENTS’ STATE AFFECT Darby Saxbe, Larissa Borofsky,
Jonas Kaplan, Mary Helen Immordino-Yang, Gayla Margolin;
University of Southern California - Adolescence is a time of
individuation from parents, and thereby also a time of
heightened family conflict. Youths’ ability to understand,

and empathize with, their parents’ emotions may help
promote family functioning. This study examines the
neural correlates of youths’ evaluating their parents’ state
affect in conjunction with their history of exposure to
aggressive family conflict and their performance on a
measure of social sensitivity, the Reading The Mind In
The Eyes Test (Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Hill, Raste, &
Plumb, 2001). We hypothesized that these moderators
might affect neural activation in regions associated with
social processing, emotional processing, and empathy,
including the posteromedial cortices, the medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC), the insula, and the ventral
striatum (VS). The VS has been linked to social reward
processing, while the insula, which has been implicated in
interoceptive awareness, may also play a role in
embodying the emotions of others (Immordino-Yang,
McColl, Damasio, & Damasio, 2009). In an event-related
design, 21 adolescents (11 males, mean age 16.9 years)
viewed 5-second silent video clips featuring images of
themselves, their mother, their father, or an unfamiliar
peer. The clips of the youth and parents came from a
previously recorded family discussion. Clips featured
only the target person (mother, father, self, peer). After
each clip, youth were asked “How did you (or she, or he)
feel?” and responded using the button box in the scanner.
Participants were recruited from a longitudinal study in
which parents and children rated family conflict behavior
at two prior timepoints, approximately four years and
two years before scanning took place. Ratings of
physically aggressive and aversive behavior were
combined across reporters and study waves to create a
cumulative family aggression index. Additionally, before
scanning, youth took the Mind In The Eyes Test, in which
participants are shown 36 faces, cropped so only the eyeregion is visible, and asked to select one of four adjectives
describing the emotion presented in the face (for example,
“arrogant,” “grateful”). The task has been used widely to
assess “mentalizing” ability. The Mind-Eyes score was
negatively correlated with history of aggressive family
conflict behavior, r(20) = -.47, p = .04, suggesting that
youth from more aggressive families showed less skill in
detecting emotional expressions.
fMRI data were
acquired using a 3T Siemens TRIO scanner and analyzed
with FLAME mixed effects analysis using FSL’s FEAT
(fMRI Expert Analysis Tool), with a cluster corrected
threshold of z = 2.3, p<.05. We contrasted the parent
condition (mother and father conditions combined) with a
fixation cross baseline and entered the Mind-Eyes score as
a regressor. Higher scores were associated with more
activation (p<.05) in the VS, insula (bilaterally),
precuneus, and posterior cingulate (PCC). When
aggressive family conflict exposure was entered as a
regressor, it was associated with greater activation in the
precuneus and mPFC, and decreased activation in the
insula (bilaterally), suggesting that youth from more
aggressive families may be engaging in less
interoceptively-driven processing of their parents’
emotions but are activating more of the “mentalizing
network” that includes the PMCs and mPFC.

H-53

*SANS Poster Award Winner

PROTECTIVE FACTORS FOR CHILDREN IN CARE:
EVIDENCE DERIVED FROM BRAIN IMAGING, HPA
AXIS
REACTIVITY
AND
DEVELOPMENTAL
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY Vanessa Puetz, University Hospital
Aachen, *ICNC Travel Award Winner; Nils Kohn,
University Hospital Aachen; Beate Herpertz-Dahlmann,
University Hospital Aachen, JARA Translational Brain
Medicine; Kerstin Konrad, University Hospital Aachen, JARA
Translational Brain Medicine, INM, Research Centre Juelich Introduction:
Early
maternal
separation
(EMS)
experiences can disrupt a child’s attachment process and
interfere with the psychosocial development of an infant.
However, it remains unclear how EMS impacts on
children's social perception of day-to-day negative
experiences such as peer-rejection and potentially
translates
into
emotional
and
neuroendocrine
dysfunction. This study aims to investigate the effects of
past separation and placements, time spent in a stable
environment, gender and ethnic background on the
neural reactivity to psychosocial stress.
Methods: 25
children who were permanently separated from their
biological parents before their 3rd year of life (mean age
10.6±1.7;
mean
IQ=101.87±10.6;
mean
age
of
separation=1.3 years¬±1.08) and 26 children that grew up
with their biological parents (mean age=10.51¬±1.7; mean
IQ=104.96¬±9.5) underwent a social-exclusion paradigm
in MRI to investigate the neural correlates of social
exclusion and afterwards indicated their subjective
feelings of exclusion and frustration. Salivary morning
cortisol levels were collected on three consecutive days.
Results: Results indicated that EMS children felt
significantly more frustrated and excluded during the
exclusion by the other players than never-separated
controls [exclusion: t(46)=-2.61, p=0.006; frustration
t(46)=-2.24, p=0.005], regardless of gender, reflecting a
social perception bias for negative social experiences. On
the neural level, results indicated that EMS children (as
compared to controls) showed significantly less brain
activity during social exclusion in regions previously
associated with the cognitive control of emotion, such as
the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and less
functional connectivity (PPI) with the prefrontal cortices
(dlPFC/mPFC). Conversely, EMS children showed
stronger activation in the middle temporal gyrus (MTG).
Importantly, no significant differences in the subjective
degree of exclusion and frustration or on the neural level
were found between German adoptees and adoptees with
a different ethnic background (U(48)=311.5, p=.13),
indicating that the adverse effects of separation on social
perception and neural reactivity were rather universal.
This reduction in fronto-cingulate activity was
significantly related to lower morning cortisol levels
(dlPFC rs=.456, p=.022; dACC rs=.520, p=.009) in EMS
children and more transitory secondary placements
before the final placement (dlPFC rs=-.399, p=.024). Better
present relationship quality with the current caregivers
was significantly associated with the total time spent in
the family since separation (rs=.478, p=.008) and those
EMS children who resided longer in their family showed
significantly less psychopathological behavior (rs=-.617,
p=.001), independent of gender or ethnicity. Conclusion:

Our data suggest that EMS has long-lasting effects on the
neural, endocrine and psychological functioning of
children in care and these effects might a) underlie
differential reactivity to rejection in everyday life and b)
might mediate the path to affective disorders, which are
highly prevalent in EMS children. Importantly though,
we could demonstrate that time can be a protective factor,
as those children in our study who experienced less
transitory placements and spent more time in a stable
environment showed more typical neural activity, a better
relationship quality - and less psychopathological
behavior, regardless of gender and ethnic background.
H-54
BODILY RESPONSES AND THE VULNERABILITY
TO ANXIETY: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Satoshi
Umeda, Keio University, University College London; Neil A
Harrison, University of Sussex, Sussex Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust; Marcus A Gray, University of Queensland,
Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital; Christopher J Mathias,
University College London, Imperial College London at St
Mary's Hospital; Hugo D Critchley, University of Sussex,
Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust - Emotional
processes are closely coupled to autonomic bodily
responses. Neural centres for the control of autonomic
bodily responses are implicated as substrates for normal
and pathological emotions. This relationship may
underlie constitutional vulnerabilities to affective
disorders.
Exaggerated
patterns
of
autonomic
responsivity can enhance the expression of panic or
anxiety symptoms. Patients with postural tachycardia
syndrome (PoTS) are characterized by abnormal
autonomic responses, including cardiac reactivity. PoTS
patients are overrepresented across stress-sensitive
psychosomatic and neuropsychiatric disorders and
experience symptoms that overlap with anxiety disorders.
We combined emotional challenges with autonomic
psychophysiology and functional brain imaging to test
the prediction that PoTS patients show abnormal
autonomic reactivity to emotional challenges through
brain regions implicated in anxiety. We recruited twelve
patients with well-characterised PoTS and twelve agematched healthy controls. Participants completed
questionnaire-ratings of anxiety, depression, panic and
personality traits and underwent functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) with simultaneous heart rate
recording while processing picture stimuli (faces and
scenes) spanning five emotional categories (happy, angry,
disgust, sad, and neutral). Our sample of PoTS patients
scored significantly higher for state and trait anxiety,
depressive symptoms and neuroticism compared to
controls. Five of the patients had past experience of panic
attacks.
Physiologically,
PoTS
patients
showed
exaggerated heart rate responses to stimulus
presentations, independent of emotional type. At the
neural level, PoTS patients showed greater deactivation of
ventromedial prefrontal cortex to stimuli and enhanced
activity within precuneus, middle temporal gyrus and
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, compared to controls.
The change in ventromedial prefrontal activity was
related to the magnitude of heart rate change, while
activity within globus pallidus and putamen correlated

positively with state anxiety score. The degree of
functional coupling between these frontal and striatal
regions was further predicted by the magnitude of
expressed anxiety. Our findings endorse the view that
PoTS patients are constitutionally vulnerable to anxiety
symptoms through the central generation and control of
exaggerated autonomic reactions to external affective
challenges. Our study further implicates neural
mechanisms involving ventral frontostriatal interaction
and has broad relevance to the expression of PoTS within
range of psychosomatic and neuropsychiatric disorders.
H-55
CROSS-CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN CREATIVITY
Mayseless, N., Kleinmintz, O., Ivancovsky, T., Kurman, J.,
Shamay-Tsoory; University of Haifa - Although cultural
differences in creativity have been repeatedly reported,
there is thus far little evidence for the biological
underpinnings of these differences. An abundance of
studies that compared levels of creativity between
cultures documented lower levels of creativity in nonWestern compared to Western cultures. Creativity has
been defined as the ability to produce responses which
are both novel (i.e., original and rare) and suitable (i.e.,
adaptive according to the task constrains). We recently
proposed a neural model of creativity, according to which
the generation phase is mediated by a frontal- posterior
network (particularly on the right hemisphere), and the
evaluation phase is mediated by a left frontotemporal
network where ideas are evaluated and filtered and may
be inhibited. In line with the twofold model of creativity,
it is possible that differences in the activation of the
evaluation system may account for cultural differences in
creativity. Indeed, cross-cultural studies pertained to the
fact that in East-Asian cultures being different from others
is sanctioned and therefore deviance can threat selfesteem. In the first experiment we show that when
subjects are involved in evaluation of originality, a left
frontal and parietal network is activated. Additionally,
correlation analysis indicated that activity in these left
lateralized areas may inhibit original responses by
diminishing the number of responses given. In the second
study we document behavioral cross-cultural differences
in creativity in a group of Israelis and Koreans. Finally,
the neuroimaging data support the behavioral findings
and show different activations between the two groups.
H-56
SELF REPORT COGNITIVE DEFICITS CORRELATE
WITH DEPRESSION IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
(TBI) Santana E., Lengenfelder J., Strober L., Persaud U.,
Chiaravalloti, N.D.; Kessler Foundation Research Center Objective: Both depression and cognitive impairment are
common following TBI. The Perceived Deficits
Questionnaire (PDQ) is a widely used screening measure
that evaluates self perceived cognitive impairment. We
examined the relationship between self-reported deficits
on the PDQ, performance on objective measures of
cognitive functioning and depression. Participants &
Methods: Participants consisted of 40 individuals with
moderate to severe TBI. Memory and executive functions

were measured using the CVLT II, D-KEFS Tower Test
(achievement), D-KEFS Verbal Fluency (letter total), DKEFS Color-Word (inhibition) and D-KEFS Trail Making
(switching). Depression was measured with the Chicago
Multiscale Depression Inventory (CMDI). We examined
relationships among the tests using Pearson Product
Moment correlations, examining the relationship between
the self reported cognitive status (PDQ), depression
(CMDI) and selected neuropsychological measures.
Results: A significant relationship was noted between the
CVLT Learning Slope Trials 1-2) and the PDQ (r=.385,
p<.05). No other significant correlations were noted
between objective measures of cognitive functioning and
self reported cognitive abilities.
Positive correlations
were also noted between scores on the CMDI and the
PDQ(r=.4.5-5.9; p<.001).
Conclusions:
The only
significant relationship noted between objective tests of
cognitive functioning and self reported cognition was
between the CVLT Learning Slope for Trials 1-2 and the
PDQ. This is consistent with previous work from our lab
noting that self reported memory correlates with only the
first exposure of memory stimuli on neuropsychological
tasks.
Self reported cognitive abilities was also
significantly related to depressive symptomatology
These findings highlight the importance of combining self
report measures of cognitive function with objective
neuropsychological testing when assessing cognitive
deficits, as well as weighing the influence of emotional
symptomatology on self report.
H-57
CONTEXT-DEPENDENT PREDICTIONS INFLUENCE
NEURAL PROCESSING OF OBSERVED GOALDIRECTED ACTION Sasha Ondobaka, Marco Wittmann,
Floris P. de Lange, Harold Bekkering; Radboud University
Nijmegen - Dominant accounts of action understanding
propose that action outcomes are derived by direct
mapping of observed movements onto observer’s parietofrontal circuits involved in movement control. From the
opposite perspective, movement control is based on
Bayesian inference, combining the a priori expectation of
the action (prior) and the conditional likelihood of
perceiving the executed movement (likelihood). Here, we
used an action expectation paradigm in fMRI to examine
whether a similar Bayesian principle underlies
understanding of others’ observed action. Participants
inferred whether context-dependent priors matched the
subsequently observed grasping movements, which had
high or low likelihood of occurrence. Preceding action
observation, visual and somatosensory association cortex
encoded the prior, by showing larger activity for priors
with low probability. During action observation, primary
somatosensory cortex encoded movement likelihood that
matched prior expectation, while inferior frontal cortex
(IFC) showed greater activity when observed movements
mismatched the prior. When the likelihood of perceiving
the observed movements matched prior expectations, IFC
showed enhanced functional connectivity with sensory
association cortices that encoded both these quantities.
Together, the findings provide support for a Bayesian
account of action understanding and expand our
knowledge how human brain combines context-

dependent prior expectations with the most likely sensory
information about the movement.
H-58
NEURAL REGULATION OF SOCIAL APPROACHAVOIDANCE BEHAVIOR AFTER TESTOSTERONE
ADMINISTRATION Sina Radke, Radboud University
Nijmegen; Inge Volman, Radboud University Nijmegen;
Pranjal Mehta, Universiy of Oregon; Veerle van Son, Radboud
University Nijmegen; Ivan Toni, Radboud University
Nijmegen; Alan Sanfey, Radboud University Nijmegen; Ellen
de Bruijn, Leiden University; Karin Roelofs, Radboud
University Nijmegen - The steroid testosterone is an
adaptive social hormone involved in a wide range of
motivational behaviors. It modulates the perception of
social challenges, e.g. threat, and decreases anxiety, which
can lead - dependent on the social context - to dominance
and competition, but also to prosocial behaviors. Recent
administration studies demonstrated that testosterone
increases approach behavior to angry faces by means of
unconscious eye gaze and automatic social approachavoidance tendencies (Terburg et al., 2012; Enter et al., in
prep). The neural mechanisms of these endocrine
modulations of social approach behavior, however,
remain largely unclear. Correlational evidence from a
male sample (Volman et al., 2011) pointed to an
association of higher endogenous testosterone levels and
1) decreased activity of the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
and 2) reduced connectivity between the ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex and the amygdala during social
motivational behavior. In order to investigate the causal
role of testosterone in the modulation of prefrontal
activity and coupling with limbic areas, the present study
used a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind
between-subject design. Four hours after having received
0.5mg testosterone or placebo sublingually, 54 healthy
females underwent functional magnetic resonance
imaging while performing the Approach-Avoidance Task.
In this reaction time task, participants responded to
happy and angry facial expressions by pulling a joystick
towards (approach) or pushing it away from their body
(avoid). In addition, endogenous testosterone and cortisol
levels as well as personality traits relating to anxiety and
motivation were assessed. A selection of behavioral and
neuroimaging results will be presented and discussed in
the light of previous research on the vital role of social
hormones, i.e. testosterone and oxytocin, in regulating
social adaptive behavior.
H-59
THE IMPACT OF EMOTIONS ON COGNITIVE
CONTROL: A DEVELOPMENTAL ERP STUDY Laura
Vuillier, Denes Szucs, David Whitebread; University of
Cambridge - Introduction: The ability to monitor and
control our actions according to our current goals is a
complex mechanism that has been defined as cognitive
control. The control of such goal-driven behaviour is
particularly important in the presence of emotional
information, as we are constantly challenged by
emotional cues. The development of such function,
especially in the context of negative emotion, is crucial for

socio-emotional
functioning,
particularly
during
childhood. However, only little research has been looking
at the effect of emotion on cognitive control. The current
study aims at investigating the development of the ability
to maintain cognitive control in the context of interfering
emotional information and answer questions such as:
What is the effect of emotion on cognitive control? Are we
using the same cognitive strategies in an emotional and
non-emotional context? Do children have the necessary
resources to use the most cost efficient strategies?
Methodology: 27 healthy adults and 25 8-year-old
children took part in an ERP experiment investigating the
effect of emotion and emotion regulation on cognitive
control strategies. In this task, the participants were told
they would receive a monetary reward that would match
their performance on the task. However, the task was
designed so that the participants would lose their points,
regardless of their performance, which was intended to
induce negative emotions such as anxiety, anger,
frustration and/or distress. The task also had low and
high cognitive demand conditions. In addition to
behavioural measures such as reaction time (RT) and
accuracy, three ERP components were analyzed, namely
the Contingent Negative Variation (CNV), the N2 and the
parietal P3 (or P3b). Results: Both children and adults
were significantly faster in the emotional condition,
whereas the accuracy did not differ and stayed relatively
high in both conditions. The adults were significantly
faster than children. Both children and adults were
significantly faster in the easy compared to the difficult
condition. In adults, the N2 was significantly larger in the
emotional compared to the non-emotional condition;
children did not show any N2 in the non-emotional
condition but showed a large negative deviation in the
emotional condition. Children did not show any CNV,
whereas adults showed a more negative CNV in the
emotional compared to the non-emotional condition. In
both children and adults, the P3b was larger in the
emotional compared to the non-emotional condition. The
CNV, N2 and P3b did not differ between the easy and
difficult conditions. Conclusion: The behavioural and
neural data showed that cognitive control is not fully
developed in 8-year-old children. Particularly, the results
from the CNV indicate that children do not seem to have
developed a proactive control strategy (as used by the
adults) and only use a reactive control strategy. The
results from the N2 and P3b show that more resources are
needed in the emotional condition. This last result is
interpreted in terms of a compensatory mechanism that
occurs when emotion regulation interacts with cognitive
control.
H-60
SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL DISTANCE DECREASES
EMPATHIC RESPONSES TO OTHERS’ SUFFERING
Diana I. Tamir, Jason P. Mitchell; Harvard University Humans respond vicariously to others’ pain. Not only do
we physically cringe when seeing another person
experience pain, but researchers have identified a
network of brain structures that responds reliably when
both personally experiencing pain and observing others
in pain, including the dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC)

and bilateral anterior insula. However, research on
psychological distance suggests that our tendency to
respond to others’ experiences is limited. Such theories
suggest that individuals will respond more robustly to
proximal suffering—pain that seems nearby or recent—
than more distal suffering—pain that occurs on the other
side of the world, in the distant past, or to unfamiliar
others. Indeed, behaviorally, people donate more after
natural disasters that occur close to home than far away
(spatial distance) and donations taper off as the disaster
recedes further into the past (temporal distance). To test
the extent to which spatial and temporal distance
diminishes responses to observing others’ in pain, we
measured spontaneous neural responses using fMRI
scanning while participants watched video feeds of two
target individuals suffering through painful experiences.
The two targets differed in their spatial and temporal
proximity to the participant: participants believed one set
of videos was being recorded live in a room down the hall
from the scanner (proximal target); the other set of videos
was previously recorded at a distant location (distal
target). Using both wholebrain and region-of-interest
analyses, we compared neural responses to the proximal
and distal pain events. Analyses revealed greater dACC,
but not insula responses while watching the proximal
target suffer than the more distal target. Together, such
findings suggest that empathic responses diminish as
individuals perceive the target of suffering to be further
away in spatial and temporal distance.
H-61
IMITATION ACTIVATES THE MIRROR NEURON
SYSTEM MORE THAN ACTION OBSERVATION OR
EXECUTION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH STROKE Mona
Sobhani, Julie Werner, Carolee Winstein, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh;
University of Southern California - The putative mirror
neuron system (MNS) includes motor-related regions that
are active both when one performs an action and when
one observes the same action being performed by another
person. It has recently been proposed that methods in
stroke rehabilitation that engage the MNS, for example
action observation or imitation, may help to rebuild
motor function despite impairments. Recent research has
shown that MNS regions affected by stroke do have intact
activation during action observation (Garrison et al, in
press). Prior research in healthy individuals has shown
that the MNS is even more strongly activated for
imitation of actions, than for observation of an action or
execution of an action alone (Iacoboni, 1999), however this
has not yet been examined in individuals with stroke.
Here, we investigate whether imitation can engage the
MNS significantly greater than action observation or
action execution alone in individuals with stroke.
Preliminary results suggest that the pattern seen in
healthy individuals does extend to individuals with
stroke, with imitation more strongly activating the MNS
than action observation or execution alone. These results
have implications for rehabilitation of motor function
after stroke.

H-62
FAIRNESS CONSIDERATIONS IN INCARCERATED
INDIVIDUALS
WITH
AND
WITHOUT
PSYCHOPATHY: INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF
CONTEXT AND INTENTIONALITY USING A
MODIFIED ULTIMATUM GAME Ellen R.A. de Bruijn,
Leiden University; Sina Radke, Radboud University Nijmegen;
Inti A. Brazil, Radboud University Nijmegen; Inge Scheper,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre; Berend H.
Bulten, Pompestichting, Nijmegen - Incarcerated individuals
with psychopathy have often committed violent crimes
against another person. Although these clear violations of
social norms may suggest a biased moral reasoning in
psychopathy, findings on utilitarian decisions remain
unclear. We assessed social decision-making based on
different aspects of fairness considerations in 18 criminal
offenders with psychopathy, 14 criminal offenders
without psychopathy and 18 matched healthy individuals
who played the role of responders in a modified
Ultimatum Game. Specifically, we focused on the effects
of the context in which a particular monetary offer was
made and the role of intentionality behind these offers.
Selected offers were paired on each trial with a varying
unselected alternative, thereby establishing the context in
which the offer was proposed. Also, all offers were either
made intentional (i.e. the unknown proposer selected one
of the two available offers) or unintentional (i.e. the
computer randomly selected one alternative). As
expected, unfair offers were most often rejected when the
alternative offer was fair and when the unfair offer was
made intentionally. Offenders without psychopathy did
not adjust their decision behavior on the basis of the
available unselected alternatives. Importantly however,
individuals with psychopathy did demonstrate a similar
rejection pattern to that of healthy individuals as both
groups took the context in which an offer was proposed
into account. Therefore, social decision-making seems to
be specifically impaired in offenders without
psychopathy. The current outcomes are in line with some
of the core features of psychopathy that require
knowledge about social conduct and cognitive
perspective-taking (e.g., manipulation or deception).
H-63
OXYTOCIN DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECTS PREFERRED
INTERPERSONAL DISTANCE OF HIGH AND LOW
EMPATHIC INDIVIDUALS Anat Perry, University of
Haifa; David Mankuta, Hadassah Medical Organization, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem; Simone Shamay-Tsoory,
University of Haifa - The space between people creates and
defines the social dynamics of our interactions with
others. Although different between cultures, within each
culture interpersonal distance is implicit but clearly felt,
especially if one stands nearer or further than expected.
Oxytocin (OT) plays a determining role in social and pair
bonding in many vertebrates and increasing evidence
suggests it is a social hormone in humans as well. As
such, we hypothesized that OT will have a facilitating
effect, enabling people to feel more comfortable at a closer
distance. Given that individual differences in social
distance preference may depend upon empathic abilities,

it was hypothesized that oxytocin may differentially affect
low and high empathic individuals. Using a withinsubject crossover design, 50 subjects performed an
interpersonal distance task following the administration
of either placebo or oxytocin, one week apart. We used a
modified version of the Comfortable Interpersonal
Distance paradigm, in which participants imagine a
friend, boss or stranger approaching (visualized on a
computer screen) and are asked to stop the figure when
feeling uncomfortable. Before performing the experiment,
participants completed the Interpersonal Reactivity Index,
a well-known validated empathy questionnaire. The
results revealed an interaction between one's empathy
trait and the OT effect, such that following intranasal
administration of OT, highly empathic individuals
preferred closer distance, while low empathic individuals
preferred standing further apart. These findings suggest
a complex role for OT as a modulator of social behavior,
questioning its potential therapeutic effects on clinical or
sub-clinical populations.

	  

	  

Poster Session J
Saturday, April 13, 5:50-7:20pm
J-01
IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT EMOTION REGULATION:
A
COMPARISON
OF
IMPLEMENTATION
INTENTIONS AND REAPPRAISAL STRATEGIES
Laura Martin Braunstein, Columbia University; Esther Kim,
Columbia University; Julia Lushing, Columbia University;
Peter Gollwitzer, New York University; Gabriele Oettingen,
New York University; Jonathan Morgenstern, Columbia
University; Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University - Despite
over a decade of research on emotion regulation, little is
known about implicit and automatic forms of emotion
control. Typical cognitive emotion regulation strategies,
such as reappraisal, involve explicitly and consciously
changing thoughts about an affective stimulus or
situation in order to reduce emotional responses to it
(Ochsner & Gross, 2008).
Such explicit emotion
regulation strategies are very effective, but they require
effort, conscious monitoring, and prefrontal brain regions
involved in cognitive control - features that make them
less accessible in certain situations and to individuals
with cognitive impairments. Given these limitations of
explicit strategies, we sought to examine the efficacy of
more implicit means of emotion regulation. We borrowed
an implicit technique from the automatic goal activation
literature
known
as
implementation
intentions.
Implementation intentions are simple if-then plans used
to
increase
goal
striving
(Gollwitzer,
1999).
Implementation intention statements consist of a critical
cue (the if component) and an action that will be taken in
the presence of that cue (the then component). In the
current study, we compared the effect of distancingfocused implementation intentions and reappraisals on
emotional responses to affective pictures. Participants
completed a computer task during which they viewed
and rated their scenes of accidents. Prior to beginning the
computer task, participants were trained to reappraise the
pictures by adopting a distant perspective and were asked
to read and remember emotional response to appetitive
and aversive pictures such as unhealthy foods and
implementation intention statements. The statements
took this form: “If I see a dessert, then I will describe it as
if I am viewing it from far away.” The language of the
reappraisal instructions and implementation intention
statements were matched, except that the implementation
intentions used the if-then format. During reappraisal
trials, engagement in distancing was explicitly directed by
a visual cue that appeared just before the picture, whereas
during implementation intention trials, distancing was
activated automatically by the critical pictures
themselves.
There was no reminder about the
implementation intentions during the task. Thus, the
critical difference between the reappraisal and
implementation intention conditions was how the
emotional distancing was initiated - explicitly and
externally in the case of reappraisal or automatically and
internally for implementation intentions. As expected,
both reappraisal and implementation intentions

decreased affective responses to the pictures relative to
natural responding. This study is the first to directly
compare explicit and implicit emotion regulation. In the
future we plan to compare reappraisal and
implementation intentions using fMRI in order to
understand the neural mechanism of implementation
intentions and whether it is distinct from or overlaps with
that of reappraisal.
J-02 *SANS Poster Award Winner
CHOOSE AND IT BECOMES PART OF YOU:
NEURAL CONSTRUCTION OF INDEPENDENT
SELVES Steven Tompson, *ICNC Travel Award Winner,
Hannah Faye Chua, Shinobu Kitayama; University of
Michigan - An increasing body of behavioral research
suggests that the act of choosing has consequences for
personal motivation (Iyengar & Lepper, 1999), social
cognition (Savani, Stephens, & Markus, 2011), and
developing one’s self-concept (Kim & Sherman, 2007).
Individuals from Western cultures (e.g., United States) are
likely to perceive choice as personally meaningful, and
researchers have argued that choices are instrumental in
forming an independent self-construal (Markus &
Kitayama, 2003). Previous research has found that people
with an independent self-construal are more likely to
perceive choice as an opportunity to express one’s own
preferences and beliefs (Savani, Markus, & Connor, 2008).
Personal choice may therefore be particularly important
in the development of self-concept for individuals from
cultures that value holding an independent self.
Currently, however, little is known about the
neurobiological basis for this process. In this study, we
used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
test the hypothesis that, upon making a choice,
individuals high in independent self-construal would
incorporate the chosen item into the neural representation
of the self (while excluding the rejected item). 24
American college students rated 120 popular music CDs,
chose one CD from each of 60 CD pairs (created by
pairing the 120 CDs initially rated), and rated the 120 CDs
again. We predicted that participants should show greater
activity for chosen (vs. rejected) options in regions related
to self-processing, and this difference should be greater
for
individuals
with
strong
independent
(vs.
interdependent) self-construals. Consistent with this
hypothesis, chosen options showed increased activity
during post-choice rating (relative to the rejected options)
in posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC), and ventral striatum, suggesting
involvement of self-referential processing, as well as
reward processing. This replicates previous research
which has found that activity in cortical midline
structures (i.e., PCC and mPFC) is linked to object
ownership and the mere ownership effect (Kim &
Johnson, 2010). Perhaps most importantly, this difference
in cortical midline activity was strongest for individuals
with independent self-construals. Together, these results
provide evidence that individual differences in the
importance of choice to one’s self-concept are reflected
(and may even be mediated) by neural activity. Given
well-established links between culture and self-construal
(Markus & Kitayama, 1991), it is possible that cultural

differences in independent and interdependent selfconstrual may influence neural representations of choice
discussed above. Future research should examine crosscultural evidence for this hypothesis as well as
developmental differences in the tendency to incorporate
choices into one’s self-concept.
J-03
DYNAMICS
OF
AMYGDALA
RESPONSES
ASSOCIATED
WITH
PERSON
DENSITY
PERCEPTION: AN MEG STUDY Nathalie George, CNRS,
Inserm, Université Pierre et Marie Curie; Thibaud Dumas,
CNRS, Inserm, Université Pierre et Marie Curie; Stéphanie
Dubal, CNRS - What is the affective impact of person
density perception? This has become a topical question in
crowded urban environments and for the mass public
transport that these entail. Numerous studies in the field
of ethology, and social psychology have shown a negative
impact of high density of persons. A key structure of the
medial temporal lobe, the amygdala, known to be
involved in emotion and social perception, seems to be
involved in the appraisal of interpersonal distance and
personal space regulation. However, there has been no
study on amygdala involvement in the perception of
person density. Here we used magnetoencephalography
(MEG) to reveal the dynamics of amygdala responses
associated with the perception of person density. Our
hypothesis was that the amygdala may be involved in the
early stages of the processing of crowded social
environments. MEG signals (306 channels whole-head
Elekta Triux system, Finland) were recorded in 30 subjects
while they viewed photographs of subway passenger cars
of variable density. A scrambled version of the stimuli
was also included in separate blocks. Each stimulus was
presented for 500 ms (inter-trial interval=1-2s). After
artifact rejection, event-related fields were averaged for
low, medium and high density photographs. Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) was used to obtain the
participants’ individual brain anatomy. Using an
automated method of amygdala segmentation combined
with weighted Minimum Norm Estimate (MNE) source
imaging using Brainstorm, the sources of magnetic
activities were localized in the amygdala volume. We
found that amygdala was activated in response to the
photographs from about 70-80 ms. There was an initial
peak of amygdala activity around 110 ms, followed by
prominent and sustained activity from about 200 ms.
Amygdala activity was modulated by person density in
both time ranges. In a next step we will examine whether
amygdala response is correlated with the affective
evaluation of the pictures of varying person density, as
well as with individual variables such as the anxiety level
and the sensitivity to interpersonal distance influence.
These data will shed new light in the involvement of
amygdala in the emotional perception of our social
environment.
J-04
A NOVEL PARADIGM FOR INVESTIGATING THE
NEURAL AND COMPUTATIONAL MECHANISMS
OF THEORY OF MIND Damian A. Stanley, Cendri A.

Hutcherson, Ghoncheh Ayazi, John P. O’Doherty, Ralph
Adolphs; California Institute of Technology - A core process
underlying day-to-day social functioning is the ability to
think about the minds of others (Theory of Mind; ToM).
Developing a detailed model of the neural computations
and mechanisms underlying ToM is crucial to
understanding both normal
and impaired social
development (e.g. Autism Spectrum Disorders – ASD).
Recent work suggests that ToM processing is subserved
by a distinct network of interconnected brain regions, but
little is known about the specific computations performed
by each region, and how they interact as a network. Here
we present a novel Theory of Mind (ToM) paradigm that
enables computational modeling of ToM learning
processes while maintaining features of traditional ToM
tasks from cognitive and developmental psychology (e.g.
the representation of false beliefs). Participants
(Mentalizers) learned about the beliefs and desires of real
people (Agents) while observing them make a series of
decisions about whether to donate an amount of money to
one of three charities, or take an amount of money for
themselves. Critically, the experiment had 2 modes. In
‘Normal’ mode, Agents’ decisions were implemented 65%
of the time, but were reversed 35% of the time. In
‘Reversal’ mode the opposite was true (35% implemented,
65% reversed). The program mode switched occasionally
and unpredictably, and was presented explicitly to the
Mentalizer on every trial, but had to be inferred by the
Agent solely from outcomes, resulting in periods of false
belief by the Agent. On each trial, Mentalizers had to give
their best estimate of three attributes about the Agent: (1)
the outcome the Agent desired (desire), (2) the mode the
Agent believed was active on that trial (belief), and (3) the
final action the agent would choose (choice). Mentalizers
then saw what the Agent chose, whether that choice was
reversed, and the outcome of the trial. Preliminary data
were collected from healthy participants, as well as from
high-functioning adults with autism spectrum disorder
(ASD). Analysis of performance revealed two distinct
groups of healthy participants, those who were able to
learn about the Agents, and those who were not.
Participants with ASD showed considerable variability in
their estimates of belief and desire, but logically
integrated those estimates to generate a choice prediction
at above-chance levels. While preliminary, this finding
suggests that those with ASD can form internal
representations of other people, even though those
representations may be inaccurate predictors of other
people’s behavior.
More importantly, these data
demonstrate that this novel ToM paradigm, in
combination with model-based functional magnetic
resonance imaging, has the potential to elucidate the
specific computational and neural processes through
which we learn about other people.
J-05
EARLY DAMAGE TO THE AMYGDALA BLUNTS
AFFECTIVE REACTIVITY BUT NOT AFFECTIVE
LEARNING Eliza Bliss-Moreau, David G. Amaral; California
National Primate Research Center, University of California
Davis - For the last twelve years, we have been following
the affective development of a cohort of rhesus macaques

that sustained bilateral, complete damage to the
amygdala as neonates in order to investigate whether the
amygdala is critical for developing normal affective
responding.
Across their lifespans, animals with
neonatal amygdala damage, compared to age-matched
control animals, have demonstrated consistently reduced
affective reactivity in the presence of novel objects and
those thought to engender threat like responding (BlissMoreau et al., 2010; 2011). We recently demonstrated that
these animals also have blunted affective responses to
video stimuli depicting positive and negative social
interactions and conspecifics’ social signals (Bliss-Moreau,
Bauman, & Amaral, 2011) suggesting that early amygdala
damage permanently alters amygdala-lesioned animals’
affective lives. To further test this hypothesis, our subjects
completed an affective associative learning task (i.e., “fear
potentiated startle”) during which a light was associated
with an aversive air puff to the face. When learning
occurs, the light serves to increase the magnitude of
startle to a 100 dB burst of white noise. Learning of this
sort is amygdala-dependent in adult rhesus monkeys
(Antoniadis, et al., 2007; 2009).
Prior to the tasks’
learning phase, we measured animals’ startle responses to
a series of loud white noise bursts (80 to 115 dB).
Compared to control animals, amygdala-lesioned animals
generated significantly smaller startle responses to the
white noise bursts. Both control and amygdala lesioned
animals generated larger startle responses to the loudest
white noise burst (115 dB), as compared to the quietest (80
dB), indicating that amygdala-lesioned animals’ still had
the ability to modulate their responses based on stimulus
intensity.
Similarly, amygdala lesioned animals had
significantly smaller startle responses to the aversive air
puff to the cheek (100 psi, 1.2 seconds, via 4 6.35 mm
nozzles ~10-12 cm from the face) used in the learning
phase of the task.
Strikingly, and despite their
dramatically blunted affective reactivity, amygdalalesioned animals were able to learn the association
between the light and aversive air puff.
Amygdalalesioned and control animals startle responses’ in the
presence of the light were significantly greater after the
light was paired with the aversive air-puff than before it
was paired indicating that the light acquired fear value
for both groups of animals. Taken together, these
findings suggest that plasticity during neural
development is able to account for some, but not all, of
the functions normally attributable to the amygdala.
Implications for understanding the amygdala’s role in
normal and pathological affective processing will be
discussed.

that included perceptual-motor regions involved in
imitation, the reward system and the default mode
network (DMN), thought to be important for metalizing
about the self and others (Losin et al., 2009). Here, we
tested this model in a series of three fMRI studies focused
on imitative learning biases related self-similarity and
social status that are thought to increase the efficiency of
cultural learning. In the first two studies, we asked how
gender and race, social categories that can suggest selfsimilarity and status, would modulate activity in the
different nodes of our cultural learning model. In the
third study, we asked how a more abstract type of social
grouping, ideological similarity, influenced the neural
mechanisms of imitation. Across the studies participants
imitated and observed male and female models from
three racial groups (European American (EA), African
American (AA) and Chinese American (CA)) perform
unfamiliar hand gestures. In study one, participants were
20 European American young adults. In this study we
found that nodes of the reward system were modulated
by gender similarity between model and imitator (Losin
et al., 2012a), whereas perceptual-motor regions related to
imitation were modulated by the model’s race in a way
more consistent with social status associations (Losin et
al., 2012b). In study two, we tested whether these
phenomena differed between the original sample of
European American participants and an age- and SESmatched sample of African American participants (N=20).
Surprisingly, we found that the race of the imitator
modulated neural activity during imitation and imitation
accuracy largely independently of the imitator’s own race,
suggesting that commonly held cultural stereotypes
rather than differential cultural experience might drive
neural mechanisms of imitative biases related to race in
these groups (Losin et al., resubmitted). In the third study,
we employed a new sample of 17 European American
young adults. In this study we found that while shared
ideology impacted feelings of interpersonal similarity in a
comparable manner to gender and race, it was encoded
by a different neural system during imitation (the DMN),
the third system in our cultural learning model (Losin et
al, in prep.). This body of work provides empirical
support for our neural model of cultural imitative
learning in the context of imitative biases and suggests
that the nodes of this model may be differentially
engaged depending on the level of abstraction of the
social category. These findings also suggest that aspects
of culture beyond ethnic background, such as social
status, may shape neural mechanisms related to cultural
acquisition.

J-06
MAPPING
THE
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
CULTURAL IMITATIVE LEARNING Elizabeth Reynolds
Losin, UCLA, University of Colorado Boulder; Marco Iacoboni,
Mirella Dapretto, UCLA - Cultural learning through
imitation is one of the core mechanisms of cultural
acquisition. Although cultural neuroscience studies are
beginning to reveal how cultural experience shapes the
brain, little is known about the neural underpinnings of
cultural acquisition itself. We previously proposed a
model of the neural underpinnings of cultural learning

J-07
IMAGINING OTHER PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES IN
DEVELOPMENTAL AMNESIA: AN FMRI STUDY
Jennifer S. Rabin, York University; Rosanna K. Olsen, Rotman
Research Institute; Asaf Gilboa, Rotman Research Institute,
University of Toronto, The Heart and Stroke Foundation
Centre for Stroke Recovery; R. Shayna Rosenbaum, York
University, Rotman Research Institute - Findings from
neuroimaging and patient lesion studies show that the
hippocampus plays an integral role in episodic
remembering, imagining of personal events, and in scene

construction. There are, however, several reports of cases
who retain these abilities despite hippocampal damage.
Among these cases are a person with hippocampal
developmental amnesia who could recall some episodic
memories (Maguire et al., 2001) and a person with intact
scene construction despite adult-onset hippocampal
amnesia (Mullally et al, 2012). fMRI findings suggest that
the patients’ intact performance was associated with
residual function in the remaining hippocampal tissue. In
the current study, we had the unique opportunity to
measure activation of residual anterior and posterior
hippocampal tissue in a developmental amnesic person
(H.C.) as she engaged in episodic remembering and
imagining the experiences of known and unknown others.
Participants were scanned with fMRI as they recollected
past experiences via episodic memory in response to
personal photos (‘EM’ condition) and imagined other
people’s experiences in response to photos of personally
familiar others (‘pToM’ condition) and unfamiliar others
(‘ToM’ condition). Following the scan, participants were
asked to describe the events as they had been recollected
or imagined in the scanner. Narratives were scored using
an adapted Autobiographical Interview scoring
procedure. Due to the visually rich nature of the photos,
internal details were further classified as either
descriptive (i.e., details that describe the visual content of
the photo) or elaborative (i.e., details that go beyond what
is visually depicted in the photo). To examine activity
within the hippocampus, we created four regions of
interest (ROI) masks corresponding to the left and right
anterior and posterior portions of the hippocampus. The
average percent signal change for each ROI was
calculated for the early (i.e., searching for the event) and
late phase (i.e., expanding on event details) of EM, pToM,
and ToM event generation. Behaviourally, H.C. was
impaired compared to controls on elaborative details of
episodic remembering and imagining of known others’
experiences. She was intact, however, on imagining of
unknown others’ experiences. Despite her differential
behavioural impairment, ROI analyses revealed the
presence of bilateral anterior and posterior hippocampal
activation in all three conditions in H.C. These results
suggest that activation of residual hippocampal tissue
does not necessarily reflect intact behavioural
performance. Modulation of hippocampal activity and
differences in connectivity between the hippocampus and
other brain regions are explored as possible accounts for
this discrepancy.
J-08
5-HTTLPR
GENOTYPE
MODERATES
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN AVERSIVE PARENTING
AND
HIPPOCAMPAL
AND
AMYGDALA
STRUCTURE DURING ADOLESCENCE Keriann Little,
University of Melbourne; Craig A. Olsson, Deakin University,
Murdoch Childrens Research Institute; Nicholas B. Allen,
University of Melbourne - Background: A common
variation within the promoter of the serotonin transporter
gene (5-HTTLPR) has been repeatedly linked with
increased risk for stress-associated disorders such as
depression, particularly following stressful life events or
adversity, including adverse family environments (Caspi,

Hariri, Holmes, Uher, & Moffitt, 2010). There is also
evidence that, in psychiatrically healthy individuals, 5HTTLPR genotype influences the volume of brain regions
involved in emotion regulation and stress-responsivity,
including the hippocampus and amygdala (Scharinger,
Rabl, Sitte, & Pezawas, 2010). Aims: We investigated
whether 5HTTLPR genotype moderated correlations
between aversive parenting and hippocampal and
amygdala volumes during adolescence.
Methods:
Participants were 175 adolescents (initially aged 12-13
years, 91 girls). When participants were 12-13 years old,
mother-adolescent dyads engaged in 20-min pleasant
event-planning (EPI) and problem-solving (PSI)
conversations in the laboratory, which were designed to
elicit positive and negative emotions respectively.
Mothers’ affective behaviour was coded in real time using
the Living in Family Environments (LIFE) coding system
(Hops et al., 1995). In this study, the construct of interest
was the frequency of Aversive behaviors displayed by
mothers on both the EPI and the PSI. Aversive behaviors
included displays of contemptuous, angry, or belligerent
affect, or disapproving, threatening or argumentative
verbal content with neutral affect. Structural MRI data
was also collected when participants were 12-13 years and
volumetric assessment was via manual delineation of
specific regions of interest (ROI). Saliva samples were
obtained for genetic analysis and genotyping was
performed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification and visualization by gel electrophoresis.
Results: Path analysis indicated an overall significant
correlation between more frequent displays of aversive
parenting in the EPI and larger left hippocampal volume,
and that this association was significantly moderated by
5HTTLPR genotype. Post hoc simple slope analyses
suggested no relationship between aversive parenting
and left hippocampal volume in S carriers, but a
significant trend for more frequent displays of aversive
parenting to be associated with larger volumes for L
homozygous individuals. A similar pattern was observed
between aversive parenting in the EPI and the right
hippocampus at trend level. More frequent aversive
parenting in the PSI was correlated with both larger left
and right amygdala volumes overall, and again 5HTTLPR
was found to be a significant moderator of these
relationships. In L-homozygous individuals, higher levels
of aversive parenting were associated with both larger left
and right amygdala volumes. In contrast, in S-carriers,
greater aversive parenting was associated with smaller
left and right amygdala volumes. Significance: These
findings suggest that both hippocampus and amygdala
structure may be affected by aversive parenting
environment. Hippocampal volumes were related to
aversive parenting displayed during pleasant eventplanning interactions between adolescents and their
mothers, whilst amygdala volumes were associated with
aversive parenting in more conflictual problem-solving
interactions.
Moreover,
these
brain-environment
correlations were moderated by 5HTTLPR genotype;
more aversive parenting was generally correlated with
increased hippocampal and amygdala volumes in L
homozygous adolescents whilst smaller amygdala
volumes were observed for S-carriers.

J-09
“YOU SAY SO, WHO KNOWS IF IT IS TRUE”
INFLUENCES OF SOCIAL HIERARCHY ON THE
SENTENCE COMPREHENSION AND CONFIDENCE
Hernando Santamaría-García, Alba Ayneto, Nuria SebastiánGallés; Universitat Pompeu Fabra - Social hierarchies
modulate some cognitive processes. Nevertheless, the
study of the influence of social hierarchy on sentence
comprehension is scarce. We presented sentences with
different levels of plausibility uttered by speakers with
different hierarchical status (as previously established
through a hierarchical video game) and measured the
modulations of the N400 component. Participants heard
three subsets of sentences with different plausibility
value, depending on the last word (high, intermediate
and low-plausibility). Sentences could be spoken by a
superior or by an inferior status player. When listening to
the superior player, the modulation of the N400
component followed the expected pattern (inverse
relationship
between
amplitudes
and
sentence
plausibility). However, when participants heard the
Inferior speaker the amplitude of the N400 in high
plausible sentences matched that of intermediate
plausibility (increased). This result could be interpreted as
an indicator electrophysiological of the trust process. Our
findings are showing that participants’ did not trust low
rank speakers, even if sentences were high-plausible.
J-10 *SANS Poster Award Winner
DISRUPTING THE LEFT PREFRONTAL CORTEX
DIMINISHES
CHOICE-INDUCED
PREFERENCE
CHANGE Flavia Mengarelli, Silvia Spoglianti, Alessio
Avenanti, Giuseppe di Pellegrino; Università di Bologna,
Centro Studi e Ricerche in Neuroscienze Cognitive - In
everyday life, people often find themselves facing difficult
decisions between options that are equally attractive.
Cognitive dissonance theory states that after making a
difficult choice between two equally preferred options,
individuals no longer find the alternatives similarly
desirable. Rather, they often change their existing
preferences to align more closely with the choice they
have just made. Despite the relevance of cognitive
dissonance in modulating behavior little is known about
the brain processes crucially involved in choice-induced
preference change. In the present study, we applied
cathodal transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) to
suppress neural activity in the left or the right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) during a revised
version of Brehm’s (1956) free-choice paradigm. We found
that suppression of the left, but not of right DLPFC
activity caused a reduction of the typical behaviorinduced preference change, relative to sham stimulation.
Our findings highlight the role of prefrontal cortex in
cognitive dissonance and provide causative evidence that
left DLPFC plays a necessary role in the implementation
of choice-induced preference change.
J-11 *SANS Poster Award Winner
SOCIAL
INFLUENCE:
NEURAL
CORRELATES
ASSOCIATED
WITH
RESISTANCE
VERSUS
COMPLIANCE Christopher N. Cascio, Matthew O'Donnell,

Frank Tinney, Joe Bayer, Kristin Shumaker, Josh Carp, Emily
B. Falk; University of Michigan - Throughout life social
influences shape our decisions, attitudes, and behaviors.
This is especially true during adolescence, a period when
individuals are particularly susceptible to social influence.
Social influence can come from direct contact with peers,
or from mediated sources such as online reviews, ratings,
or social network sites.
While social influence in
adolescence has been widely studied, relatively little is
known about the neural mechanisms involved in
responses to everyday social experiences, including social
influence.
The present study seeks to extend our
understanding of social influence in adolescence by
examining neural correlates associated with behavior
change during a social influence task.
Forty-six
adolescent boys aged 16-17 completed two rounds of a
social influence task examining preferences towards
mobile game applications (e.g., Angry Birds). The first
round was completed prior to an fMRI session, measuring
baseline attitudes towards games that were previously
unfamiliar to participants. The second round occurred
during an fMRI session, where participants were exposed
to their peers’ game ratings (same, higher, lower, or not
rated) then re-rated the games. In addition during the
fMRI session participants also completed a social
exclusion task (Cyberball).
We hypothesized that
individual differences in sensitivity to social and
emotional cues during exclusion (compared to inclusion
in Cyberball) would be associated with participants’
decisions to conform (vs. maintaining their original
preferences) during the app-rating task. To test this
hypothesis, we identified neural regions of interest (ROIs)
associated with the main effect of exclusion in Cyberball
(DMPFC, subgenACC, anterior insula [AI]), and extracted
parameter estimates of individual differences in activity
within these regions. We then regressed these values
onto overall rates of behavior change in response to peer
feedback in the app-rating task, as well as the contrast of
neural activity when participants conformed, versus
failed to conform with peer ratings in the app-rating task.
On average during the app-rating task, participants
changed their preferences to be in line with the peer
group 45.2% of the time, however participants were
significantly more likely to change their rating when
peers rated the game lower than the participant’s rating
(M = 51.9%) versus when peers ostensibly rated the
games higher (M = 38.5%), p < .001.
Individual
differences in neural activity within the main Cyberball
ROIs were not associated with frequency of behavior
change during the app-rating task, but were associated
with the underlying neural response to group opinions
that differed from the participants. More specifically,
individual differences in neural responses to exclusion
during Cyberball within DMPFC and AI were associated
with greater activity in neural regions associated with
conflict detection (dACC) when participant’s failed to
conform with differing group opinions, and with
increased activity in the brain’s reward system (within
OFC) when changing one’s preference to align with the
group. Thus, individuals who are more sensitive to social
and emotional feedback may also experience stronger
responses to situations when their opinions are out of line
with the group, and may suggest that for these

individuals, conforming offers a means of reducing
conflict and increasing reward.
J-12
VASOPRESSIN
ALTERS
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY OF THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX AND THE RIGHT AMYGDALA DURING
THE PROCESSING OF SOCIALLY THREATENING
STIMULI Claudia Brunnlieb, University Magdeburg,
University Lübeck; Bodo Vogt, University Magdeburg; Claus
Tempelmann, University Magdeburg; Thomas F. Münte,
University Lübeck; Marcus Heldmann, University Lübeck,
University Magdeburg - The neuropeptide arginine
vasopressin (AVP) is of crucial importance for the
regulation of social behavior in diverse mammalian
species. In animal studies, AVP has been linked to the
formation of social bonds, social recognition, social
communication and protective aggression, whereas in
humans the mechanisms of AVP action are still poorly
understood.
Using fMRI in a double-blind, placebo
controlled between-groups design, we investigated the
influence of AVP on neural activations related to social
cognition and emotional empathy in a group of healthy
young men. Thirty-nine participants (AVP group: 21)
viewed pictures depicting either one or two persons
(social factor) in an emotionally neutral or negative scene
(emotional factor). AVP modulated the activation of the
right amygdala related to the emotional component of
empathy. Moreover, AVP also increased the connectivity
pattern of the right amygdala with the medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC) and the inferior parietal lobule during the
processing of pictures illustrating a socially threatening
scene. These findings suggest that AVP reduces
suppressive effects of the mPFC on amygdala activity
resulting in the observed enhanced neural activation
pattern in the amygdala. Moreover, these findings
corroborate the work by Zink et al. (2010) who previously
argued that the negative feedback loop between the
mPFC and the amygdala might be attenuated under AVP
administration resulting in more sustained neural activity
in the amygdala in response to threatening stimuli. From
an evolutionary point of view, increased amygdala
activity might be important for our survival, since it
might trigger a faster reaction to socially threatening
stimuli. At present it still remains unclear whether the
increased amygdala activity reflects a direct impact of
AVP on vasopressin V1 receptors in the amygdala or an
indirect effect via vasopressin V1 receptors in the mPFC
or other remote brain sites.
J-13
WE
APPROVE
THIS
MESSAGE:
PARTY
ENDORSEMENTS AFFECT NEURAL RESPONSES TO
POLITICAL INITIATIVES Emile Bruneau, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology; Jason Coronel, University of Illinois;
Nicholas Dufour, Massachusetts Institute of Technology;
Rebecca Saxe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology - In the
months leading up to the 2012 elections, political parties
and their advocates spent vast sums of money to
communicate their arguments for, and endorsement of,
policy positions. One particularly consequential context

for these arguments surrounds ballot initiatives, because
voters directly influence policies. How do arguments and
party endorsements affect individuals’ responses to policy
positions? Between September and November 2012 we
examined the neural correlates of political reasoning in
Democrats (n=20) and Republicans (n=11). During fMRI
scanning, participants read 60 actual state initiatives from
this and previous years, half of which were primarily
supported by Democrats, and the other half by
Republicans. The initiatives selected were relatively
unfamiliar, avoiding especially hot-button issues. Each
initiative was followed either by more information
(Neutral), or an argument in favor of the initiative
(Argument); the argument was either attributed to a nonpartisan group (\"Some people argue that…",
Nonpartisan), or to whichever political party actually
supported the proposition (\"Democrats/Republicans
argue that…", Partisan). Each initiative therefore had
three versions: neutral, non-partisan argument, partisan
argument. Participants saw only one version of each
initiative,
chosen
at
random.
After
the
information/argument was presented, participants
indicated how strongly they supported or opposed the
initiative (from 1 strongly oppose to 4 strongly support).
Consistent with previous studies in political science, we
find that participants tended to support their own party’s
initiatives in the absence of arguments (Neutral: ownparty =2.9, other-party 2.4). Adding arguments selectively
increased support for one’s own party’s initiatives (ownparty 3.1, other-party 2.5); adding party endorsements
selectively decreased support for the other party’s
initiatives (own party 3.1, other party 2.2), an effected
related to reactive devaluation. Overall, reading political
Arguments (relative to Neutral information) led to
reduced activity in brain regions associated with effortful,
externally-directed thought (e.g. intraparietal sulcus,
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) and increased activity in
brain regions associated with emotional and self-relevant
stimuli (e.g. posterior cingulate, medial prefrontal cortex).
These latter regions showed even greater activation when
the argument was endorsed by a party. These data shed
light on the mechanisms of by which party endorsements
and arguments affect the political reasoning of
individuals.
J-14
THE PROSOCIAL PUSH OF SOCIAL PAIN: DORSAL
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX AND ANTERIOR
INSULA
ACTIVATION
IN
RESPONSE
TO
REJECTION PREDICTS RECONNECTION David S.
Chester, University of Kentucky; Naomi I. Eisenberger, UCLA;
Richard S. Pond Jr.,University of Kentucky; Stephanie B.
Richman, University of Kentucky; C. Nathan DeWall,
University of Kentucky - Social rejection is a threatening
and aversive experience. Previous research has supported
the social reconnection hypothesis, which states that the
menacing nature of social isolation leads individuals to
actively pursue the formation of new relationships
(Maner, DeWall, Baumeister, & Schaller, 2007). However,
the neural mechanisms through which post-rejection
reconnection occurs remain unknown. Social rejection
reliably elicits activation of the dorsal anterior cingulate

cortex (dACC) and the anterior insula, neural regions
previously associated with the affective component of
physical pain (Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003).
Pain serves as an alarm through which we are motivated
to avoid harm and repair damage. Given this
motivational role of pain and rejection’s ability to elicit it,
we predicted that the pain of rejection, as evidenced by
activation of the dACC and anterior insula would predict
greater attempts at reconnection. To test this hypothesis,
participants experienced social acceptance and rejection
while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) and then were given a chance to behaviorally
reconnect with one of their rejecters. Replicating previous
research, rejection (as compared to social acceptance) was
associated with activation of the dACC and anterior
insula. Supporting out hypothesis, averaged activation
across these neural regions was associated with greater
attempts at behavioral reconnection. These findings
support the social reconnection hypothesis and pain
overlap theory and offer new insight as to the
psychological processes that facilitate post-rejection
reconnection.
J-15
FETAL
PROGRAMMING
EFFECTS
OF
TESTOSTERONE ON THE REWARD SYSTEM AND
BEHAVIORAL
APPROACH
TENDENCIES
IN
HUMANS Michael V. Lombardo, University of Cambridge;
Emma Ashwin, University of Bath; Bonnie Auyeung,
University of Cambridge; Bhismadev Chakrabarti, University
of Reading; Meng-Chuan Lai, University of Cambridge; Kevin
Taylor, Addenbrooke's Hospital; Gerald Hackett, Rosie
Maternity Hospital; Edward T. Bullmore, University of
Cambridge; Simon Baron-Cohen, University of Cambridge Sex differences are present in many neuropsychiatric
conditions that affect emotion and approach-avoidance
behavior. One potential mechanism underlying such
observations is testosterone in early development.
Although much is known about the effects of testosterone
in adolescence and adulthood, little is known in humans
about how testosterone in fetal development influences
later neural sensitivity to valenced facial cues and
approach-avoidance
behavioral
tendencies.
With
functional magnetic resonance imaging we scanned 25 811-year-old children while viewing happy, fear, neutral,
or scrambled faces. Fetal testosterone (FT) was measured
via amniotic fluid sampled between 13 and 20 weeks
gestation. Behavioral approach-avoidance tendencies
were measured via parental report on the Sensitivity to
Punishment and Sensitivity to Rewards questionnaire.
Increasing FT predicted enhanced selectivity for positive
compared with negatively valenced facial cues in rewardrelated regions such as caudate, putamen, and nucleus
accumbens but not the amygdala. Statistical mediation
analyses showed that increasing FT predicts increased
behavioral approach tendencies by biasing caudate,
putamen, and nucleus accumbens but not amygdala to be
more responsive to positive compared with negatively
valenced cues. In contrast, FT was not predictive of
behavioral avoidance tendencies, either through direct or
neurally mediated paths. This work suggests that
testosterone in humans acts as a fetal programming

mechanism on the reward system and influences
behavioral approach tendencies later in life. As a
mechanism influencing atypical development, FT might
be important across a range of neuropsychiatric
conditions that asymmetrically affect the sexes, the
reward system, emotion processing, and approach
behavior.
J-16
PAST BEHAVIOR AFFECTS FUTURE INVESTMENT
DECISIONS AND MODULATES ACTIVITY IN
PERSON PERCEPTION AND DECISION-MAKING
BRAIN REGIONS Victoria K. Lee, Elizabeth H. Thompson,
Rachel E. Kranton, Lasana T. Harris; Duke University - Social
psychology demonstrates people infer traits about others
from “thin slices” of behavior—brief single acts—as well
as from faces and photographs (Ambady, 2010). These
inferences activate a reliable person perception brain
network and allow for generalizations about the person
that may help guide behavior in future interactions
(Brown & Brüne, 2012). Behavioral economics
demonstrates brief descriptions of past behavior affect
social decision-making and modulates brain activity in
networks associated with decision-making processes
including valuation and prediction error (Rilling &
Sanfey, 2011). However, no study has examined the
complete process of making inferences from behavior
leading to generalization, then social decision-making
across different domains. Here, we investigate the
mechanisms underlying these generalizations for
predicting behavior in person perception domains
warmth and competence, and examine effects on future
behavior in both domains. A database of participants
completed a competence (time-estimation game) and a
warmth task (charity donations). A separate group of
participants then viewed accuracy and generosity
information for database participants in the fMRI scanner
before predicting and investing in the person’s
performance on an unrelated competence (guessing rocks
in a jar) or warmth task (trust game). This allows us to test
whether behavior in one game affects decision-making in
a separate economic game, and whether this is mediated
by the inferences made from the initial behavior. We
show that inferences of trait warmth and competence are
formed from prior behavior and affect investment
decisions in both contexts, modulating activity in brain
regions implicated in both decision-making and person
perception.
J-17
IT’S WHAT IS INSIDE THAT COUNTS: EXPLORING
THE
EFFECTS
OF
MINDFULNESS
ON
NEUROAFFECTIVE REACTIONS TO INTERNAL VS.
EXTERNAL FEEDBACK Rimma Teper, Michael Inzlicht;
University of Toronto - Mindfulness is thought to comprise
two facets - present moment awareness and the nonjudgmental acceptance of thoughts and emotions. Though
previous research has linked mindfulness to enhanced
interoception and effective emotion regulation, the ways
in which mindfulness and meditation practice may
influence individuals’ reactions to performance feedback

has not yet been studied. Specifically, we wondered: how
might meditation and mindfulness effect individuals’
neuroaffective reactions to internally-generated vs.
externally-generated feedback? To explore this question,
we conducted two studies in which we tested a) how
meditation experience and mindfulness relate to
individuals’ neural responses to their own errors (Teper &
Inzlicht, in press), and b) how trait mindfulness relates to
individuals’ neural responses to performance feedback
(Teper & Inzlicht, under review). In these studies, we
measured two different event-related potentials - the
error-related negativity (ERN) and feedback-related
negativity (FRN), as they are thought to be analogues of
one another, indexing neural reactions to internal and
external feedback, respectively. In Study 1, we recruited
experienced meditators and control participants and
recorded their brain activity using EEG while they
completed a color-naming Stroop task. We measured the
ERN, an internal index of conflict detection, which peaks
within 100 ms of error commission and is localized to the
anterior cingulate. Meditators exhibited better executive
control (i.e. less Stroop errors), higher amplitude ERNs,
and greater levels of mindfulness. Interestingly, mindful
acceptance, the more emotive facet of mindfulness,
significantly predicted ERN amplitude, such that
individuals who were open to their affective experiences
showed a stronger neuroaffective response to internal
feedback. Mindful awareness, the more cognitive facet of
mindfulness, did not predict ERN amplitude. These
findings suggest that mindful emotional acceptance helps
attune individuals to internal feedback (i.e. their own
errors), and also facilitates control. In Study 2, we
measured participants’ levels of trait mindfulness and
then recorded their neuroaffective reactions to external
performance feedback (as indexed by the FRN) while they
completed a time-estimation task. Also localized to the
anterior cingulate, the FRN is a brain response that peaks
approximately 250 ms after feedback presentation. Our
findings suggest that mindful individuals were less
aroused by negative and uncertain feedback, but that this
was especially the case for individuals who ranked highly
on the mindful acceptance facet of mindfulness. Mindful
awareness, however, did not predict FRN amplitude. The
results of this study suggest that adopting a nonjudgmental acceptance of one’s affective states may in
turn help individuals regulate negative emotions. Taken
together, the results of these studies suggest that
mindfulness may have very different consequences for
neuroaffective reactions to internal vs. external feedback.
We discuss the intriguing role of mindful acceptance in
these relationships and the implications that these
findings have for current theory on mindfulness,
executive control, and emotion regulation.
J-18
OXYTOCIN
INCREASES
DELAY
OF
GRATIFICATION Alejandro de la Vega, University of
Colorado Boulder; Christopher H. Chatham, Brown University;
Grit Herzmann, University of Colorado Boulder; Yuko
Munakata, University of Colorado Boulder - The ability to
delay gratification is essential for the pursuit of greater
long-term goals. However, humans devalue future

rewards as a function of time. These aspects of behavior
have been explained in terms of valuation systems that
favor immediate rewards, and cognitive control systems
that can override this preference. However, humans are
extremely social creatures, and delaying gratification also
relies upon an assumption of social cooperation, such that
social factors may influence delay of gratification. We test
this hypothesis by administering oxytocin, a hormone
that influences social processing. We find that this
manipulation increases choices of delayed rewards over
smaller, immediate rewards, providing causal evidence
for oxytocin in delaying gratification and highlighting the
importance of social factors in the human ability to wait
for rewards.
J-19
MOVING TOWARDS HAPPINESS: FULL BODY
MOTION MODULATES THE INTERPRETATION OF
AMBIGUOUS FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Janek S.
Lobmaier, Antje Stahnke, Fred W. Mast; University of Bern Human beings have a general tendency to avoid
unpleasant stimuli and to approach pleasant stimuli.
Various studies have demonstrated a link between
affective evaluation of stimuli and approach-avoidance
behavior. On the one hand, the evaluation of stimulus
valence has been shown to facilitate affect-congruent
approach and avoidance responses (i.e. faster approach
towards positive and avoidance of negative stimuli). On
the other hand the execution of various approach- and
avoidance behaviors (e.g. pushing or pulling a lever to
categorize stimuli with different valences) has been found
to influence stimulus evaluation, resulting in more
positive evaluations when executing an approach
behavior and in more negative evaluations when
executing an avoidance movement. In this study we
investigated whether passive full body movement
influenced whether a stimulus face was interpreted as
showing a positive (happy) or negative (angry)
expression. Specifically participants were briefly
presented with faces with ambiguous expressions (i.e.
morphs between happy and angry faces) while they were
moved forward or backward on a 6-degrees-of-freedom
motion platform (MOOG). For each face participants
indicated whether it was expressing happiness or anger.
We found that participants were more likely to categorize
faces as being happy when they were being moved
forwards compared to when being moved backwards.
These results suggest that passive approach and
avoidance movements bias our perception of emotional
faces in such a way that when approaching an ambiguous
facial expression we tend to interpret it as being positive,
while the same face appears less positive when moving
away from it. This finding is in line with a self-serving
bias, stating that people seek a positive image of
themselves and their environment. This is done with such
vigor that reality is at times selectively interpreted.
J-20
NEURAL CORRELATES OF NON-VERBAL SOCIAL
INTERACTIONS:
INSIGHTS FROM SINGLE &
DUAL-EEG ANALYSES Mathilde Ménoret, Institut des

Sciences Cognitives; Léo Varnet, Lyon Neuroscience Research
Centre; Raphaël Fargier, Institut des Sciences Cognitives; Anne
Cheylus, Institut des Sciences Cognitives; Aurore Curie,
Institut des Sciences Cognitives, Hospices Civils de Lyon;
Vincent des Portes, Institut des Sciences Cognitives, Hospices
Civils de Lyon; Tatjana A. Nazir, Institut des Sciences
Cognitives; Yves Paulignan, Institut des Sciences Cognitives Successful non-verbal communication between human
beings requires dynamic and efficient encoding of others’
gestures. Our study aimed at identifying neural markers
of social interaction and context variations in a non-verbal
task. For this, we recorded dual-EEG and arm/hand
kinematics from two participants, an actor and an
observer, in a real face-to-face paradigm. The observer
watched “biological actions” performed by the human
actor or “non-biological actions” performed by a robot.
All these actions occurred within an interactive or a noninteractive context depending on whether the observer
had to perform a complementary action or not (e.g. the
actor presents a saucer and the observer either places the
corresponding cup or does nothing). We assessed the
motor system activation via motor related potentials
(MRPs) and beta (~20Hz) oscillations of both participants.
The differences between the two context conditions were
statistically assessed using a cluster-based nonparametric
permutation test. An advanced analysis of the intersubject coherence was also performed to assess the
relationship between the brains of the two partners.
Movement kinematics did not differ in the two context
conditions and for the actor the MRPs were similar in the
two conditions. For the observer, however, an
observation-related MRP was measured in all conditions
but it was more negative in the interactive context over
fronto-central electrodes and seemed specific to the
human actor only. Concurrently, suppression of beta
oscillations was observed rapidly after the onset of the
actor’s movement for movement execution (actor’s EEG)
and observation (observer’s EEG). Critically, this
suppression was stronger in the interactive than in the
non-interactive context despite the fact that movement
kinematics did not differ in the two context conditions.
For the observer, this suppression was stronger in the
interactive than the non-interactive context independently
of whether the actor was a human or a robot. In addition,
in the beta frequency band, the inter-brain analysis
revealed that the inter-subject coherence increased during
the interactive context compared to the non-interactive
context specifically within centro-parietal electrodes.
These results suggest that acting in a social context
induced analogous modulations of motor and
sensorimotor regions in observer and actor, therefore
increasing the coherence between the two partners’
brains. Sharing a common goal during an interaction
seems thus to evoke a common representation of the
global action through a centro-parietal network that
develops over time.
J-21
HOW REAL-LIFE PRIOR EXPERIENCE INFLUENCES
TRUST DECISIONS AND REWARD LEARNING
MECHANISMS Dominic S. Fareri, Rutgers University; Luke
J. Chang, University of Colorado Boulder, University of

Arizona; Mauricio R. Delgado, Rutgers University - Social
relationships are predicated on trust-a social preference
centered on the expectation that generosity will be
reciprocated. Initial judgments of others as trustworthy
can be made rapidly based solely on facial characteristics
(Willis & Todorov, 2006); however, learning someone’s
reputation as trustworthy requires repeated interactions
and relies on neural circuitry typically implicated in
reward learning such as the striatum (e.g., King-Casas et
al., 2005). Importantly, prior descriptive knowledge
(Delgado et al., 2005) and social experience (Fareri et al.,
2012) can instill social impressions that bias decisions to
trust and the ability to update beliefs about others via
reinforcement learning mechanisms. As many daily
interactions occur with members of our social networks
already deemed as trustworthy, however, it remains
unclear how prior real-life experience with members of
one’s own social network may influence subsequent trust
decisions and social learning mechanisms.
We
investigated whether participants (n=18) would
differentially trust three partners in a repeated trust
game--a close friend (in-network), a confederate (out-ofnetwork), and a computer.
Participants played as
investors while undergoing fMRI and believed that trust
game interactions would occur in real-time. In reality, all
partners were programmed to reciprocate participants’
investments 50% of the time. We expected highest rates
of investment and enhanced reward-related neural
responses when interacting with in-network partners.
Accordingly, participants rated in-network partners as
most trustworthy and invested most often with them.
This effect of social network was observed in a ventral
striatum ROI when processing trust game outcomes.
Further, medial prefrontal cortex demonstrated enhanced
neural responses when processing outcomes of trials with
social compared to non-social partners. A reinforcement
learning analysis revealed a tendency for participants to
rely more strongly on positive trust game outcomes (e.g.,
partner reciprocation) to update beliefs about partner
reputation when playing with in-network partners. These
results suggest that real-life prior experience can bias not
only behavior but also value related neural signals during
social interactions.
J-22
BRAIN RESPONSES DURING EXTINCTION OF
LEARNED FEAR TO RACIAL IN-GROUP AND OUTGROUP FACES Tanaz Molapour, Karolinska Institutet;
Armita Golkar, Karolinska Institutet; Carlos Navarrete,
Michigan State University; Olof Hjort, Karolinska Institutet;
Andreas Olsson, Karolinska Institutet - Previous research
has shown that conditioned fear responses (CRs) to
images of members of racial out-groups, as compared to
in-groups, are more persistent and resist extinction. Much
is known about the neural processes underlying the
acquisition of CRs, involving a network of brain regions,
such as the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
anterior insula (AI), and the extinction of CRs, involving
the amygdala and prefrontal cortex (PFC). However, the
neural mechanisms supporting the persistence of learned
fear of racial out-group faces remain unexplored. The
amygdala, AI and ACC have also been implicated during

viewing of members of out-groups and stigmatized
groups, providing a link to the research on fear learning.
We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
to investigate the neural correlates of CRs to images of
male Black and White faces in White participants. During
fear acquisition, one face (the reinforced conditioned
stimulus, CS+) from each category (Black and White) was
paired with a mild electric shock. The other stimulus from
each category (CS-) served as a control stimulus, and was
never paired with a shock. Following acquisition, subjects
watched unreinforced presentations of the faces
(extinction). We found that during extinction, CRs to
Black vs White faces showed greater activity in a neural
network involved in fear learning, as well as the fusiform
face area, which is known to be relatively enhanced
during the perception of emotionally relevant faces. In
addition, CRs to Black vs White faces were linked to
increased activity in the medial and lateral PFC. Taken
together, these results suggest that the persistence of CR
to out-group vs. in-group faces might depend on an
impaired down-regulation of the fear learning network
and heightened perceptual processing in face specific
regions. Our findings might help to explain the basic
mechanisms underlying the acquisition and maintenance
of aversions towards out-group individuals.
J-23
EXAMINING THE COMPONENT PROCESSES OF
DECISION MAKING: THE INFLUENCE OF POSITIVE
AND NEGATIVE CONCEPTUAL-KNOWLEDGE AND
ASSOCIATIVE-LEARNING Pareezad Zarolia, Kateri
McRae; University of Denver - Emotions are known to
influence decision-making, but little is known about the
effects of the way that emotional information is conveyed.
Emotional information can be conveyed in the form of
conceptual-knowledge (i.e., explicit, top-down knowledge
of properties of alternatives) and associative-learning (i.e.,
pattern recognition based on experience that need not be
conscious). While both types of information are known to
influence decision-making independently, little is known
about how these processes interact to influence decisions.
In a series of three studies, we examined the effects of
conceptual-knowledge and associative-learning on
decision-making. Using an economic decision-making
task, we examined the effects of positive and negative
conceptual-knowledge and associative-learning on an
individual’s social decisions, impression formation and
their physiological response to new information as
measured by skin conductance level (SCL). We predicted
that under some circumstances, these two sources of
information would interact to inform decision-making.
We observed an interaction such that when conceptual
knowledge is provided first, it influenced positive but not
negative associative-learning. Interestingly, conceptualknowledge influenced both positive and negative
associative-learning when it was a) refreshed along with
associative-learning, and b) when the associative-learning
had already been established. These interactions
demonstrate that negative associative learning reduces
the likelihood that conceptual information will influence
decision-making, but only under certain circumstances.
This important distinction brings us closer to

understanding not only how emotional information
influences decision-making, but the relative effects of
different types of emotional information on decisionmaking.
J-24
REGULATING FEAR IN THE FACE OF STRESS
Candace Raio, New York University; Temidayo Orederu,
Hunter College; Laura Palazollo, New York University; Ashley
A. Shurick, Stanford University; Elizabeth A. Phelps, New
York University, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Research - The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is critical for
recruiting the cognitive control necessary to regulate
emotional responses to aversive stimuli. However, the
regions of the PFC that are preferentially involved in the
cognitive regulation of emotion are also those that are
selectively impaired by stress, suggesting that stress may
diminish our ability to employ these strategies precisely
at the time when they are needed most. We examined this
possibility using a fear-conditioning paradigm whereby
participants were presented with one conditioned
stimulus (CS+) that predicted a wrist-shock; the other
predicted no shock (CS-). Skin conductance response
(SCR) served as an index of fear arousal. After fear
conditioning, participants reported the emotions they felt
toward each CS and rated the intensity of these emotions.
They then underwent a cognitive regulation session
during which they learned to reappraise the CS+, and
restructure the fear conditioning session, in a less
threatening manner. After regulation training, all
participants re-rated the emotions originally reported for
the CS+. The next day, participants returned and were
either exposed to acute stress (cold pressor task) or a
matched control task before undergoing the same
conditioning session from Day 1, except that they were
instructed to utilize the cognitive regulation strategies
from the previous session. Day 1 results revealed
equivalent levels of differential fear learning (defined as
greater arousal to the CS+ relative to the CS-) between
groups. Both groups categorized the majority of emotions
they felt toward the CS+ as fearful and rated these
emotions with equal levels of intensity. After regulation
training, participants showed a marked reduction in
subjective fear that did not differ between groups. Day 2
results confirmed that our stress induction was
successful—increases in cortisol relative to baseline were
significantly greater for the stress group only. While fear
arousal to the CS+ diminished significantly in the control
group on Day 2, the stress group showed no such
attenuation; instead, they demonstrated fear arousal that
was comparable to that of the previous day. These data
suggest that stress impairs the ability to deploy cognitive
regulation strategies known to actively control emotional
responding. These findings highlight important
limitations of cognitive strategies for regulating emotional
responses and offer insight into why such strategies may
be challenging to recruit in everyday life where stress is
ubiquitous.

J-25
ANGER
BUT
NOT
HAPPINESS
LEAVES
INDIVIDUALS
WITH
AUSTISM
SPECTRUM
DISORDER DYSREGULATED Nakia S Gordon, Katherine
Reiter, Noelle Fritz, Bridget Dolan, Amy V VanHecke;
Marquette University - Emotional awareness and
regulation are important for successful functioning. One
proxy measure of emotional regulation is respiratory
sinus arrhythmia (RSA) which provides an estimation of
parasympathetic nervous system arousal. In the
Polyvagal theory (Porges, 2007), higher RSA indicates a
system that is well regulated and allows individuals to
engage in social interactions. Yet, the literature remains
mixed on whether there are state-induced changes of RSA
in response to an emotional challenge. We investigated
changes in RSA to high arousal positive and negative
emotional challenges in both typically developing
individuals (TYP) and those with Autism Spectrum
disorder (ASD). Given that ASD is a pervasive socialdevelopmental disorder that includes difficulties with
both emotional experience (Ghazziudin & Zafar, 2008)
and physiological regulation (Rossignol & Frye, 2012), we
also wanted to investigate whether there were differences
physiologically and psychologically in individuals who
do not readily express emotion. We recorded RSA, ERPs,
and emotion in 13 individuals (7 ASD). RSA and
subjective ratings of happiness, anger, and arousal were
recorded before and after each of 3 (happiness, anger,
neutral) autobiographical recall procedures. Subjectively,
all participants reported more happiness after the happy
induction, but also significantly less anger. They were
significantly angrier after the anger induction, but had no
change in reported happiness. At baseline, ASD
participants were significantly less regulated as
demonstrated by lower RSA scores. While reflecting on
their emotional stories, ASD participants were less
regulated in the Anger condition, but showed no
differences in the Happy condition relative to TYP
participants. Interestingly, ASD participants reported
feeling significantly less aroused than TYPs throughout
the experiment. These data suggest that while the
inductions were successful at inducing the target
emotions, anger is more malleable than happiness; there
were greater changes to Anger in both induction
procedures. And, only the Anger condition resulted in
more dysregulation for ASD participants. These data also
suggest that there may be a disconnection between
physiology and emotional arousal in ASD participants
given the low subjective arousal ratings. Analyses of ERP
data in response to social and non-social emotional
pictures are forthcoming.
J-26
EMOTIONAL ALTERATIONS IN BEHAVIORAL
VARIANT FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA Virginia
E. Sturm, University of California, San Francisco; William W.
Seeley, University of California, San Francisco; Howard J.
Rosen, University of California, San Francisco; Bruce L. Miller,
University of California, San Francisco; Robert Levenson,
University of California, Berkeley - Socioemotional
impairment is a hallmark feature of behavioral variant

frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), a neurodegenerative
disease that targets neural systems that are important for
emotional appraisal, reactivity, and regulation. Early loss
in frontoinsula, anterior cingulate cortex, and
orbitofrontal cortex is often accompanied by profound
behavioral changes including loss of empathy,
disinhibition, and apathy. The ways by which emotional
network degeneration gives rise to emotional symptoms,
however, remain poorly understood. In our work, we
have used laboratory-based methods from affective
science to measure autonomic, behavioral, and
experiential aspects of emotion in patients with bvFTD.
This approach has proved to be a powerful tool that has
advanced our understanding of how specific aspects of
emotional functioning are preserved and others are
disrupted in bvFTD. We have found that while certain
emotional functions (e.g., startle reactivity, generation of
happiness/amusement, and sadness) are generally intact
in bvFTD, other functions (e.g., generation of disgust and
embarrassment) are diminished. Loss in visceromotor
emotion generation and emotion regulation systems
influences behavioral and physiological emotional
reactivity in patients with bvFTD. In addition to
advancing our understanding of the emotional
mechanisms that go awry in bvFTD, this work informs
our knowledge of the neural basis of emotional and social
deficits that are relevant for psychiatric disorders and
contributes to our conceptualization of how the healthy
brain supports emotional functioning.
J-27
PORTFOLIO CHOICE VS. SINGLE CHOICE NEURAL DIFFERENCES IN COGNITIVE CONTROL
Ralf Morgenstern, University of Magdeburg; Marcus
Heldmann, University of Lübeck; Bodo Vogt, University of
Magdeburg - In experimental economics an important
issue for obtaining reliable behavioral results is the design
of payoff procedures for giving incentives to the subjects.
One common payoff procedure in multiple lottery choice
tasks is the random payoff mechanism. This mechanism
provides incentives for a truthful response in every single
choice task since every decision should be treated as
independent from other decisions. A second, often used
payoff procedure is to realize all decision. Since all
decisions are determining the final reward, subjects are
not incentivized to treat their decisions independently.
The difference in risk behavior between both payoff
procedures is known as the portfolio effect. In our study,
we address the question how these two payoff
mechanisms differ in their evaluation process since the
portfolio effect is caused by a divergence in the
independent valuation of a choice task. Evaluation
processes occur before observable behavior takes place
and can be assigned to cognitive control mechanisms. In
order to reveal such processes, we performed an EEG
paradigm comprising two sessions with equal choice
tasks, but different payoff procedures. We focus on the
stimulus locked N200 component, an event related
potential closely related to cognitive control processes.
Our behavioral data show differences between both
payoff mechanisms which can be assigned to a portfolio
effect. The analysis of the stimulus-locked event related

potentials reveals a characteristic pattern of the N200
amplitude between indifferent and sure choices.
Indifferent choices evoke higher N200 amplitudes than
sure choices which can be attributed to a higher action
control conflict when
subjects are
indecisive.
Furthermore, a higher N200 amplitude is also present for
sure lottery choices when all decision are paid out. This is
contrary to the random payoff mechanism in which an
increased N200 is absent for these choices. This implies
that more resources are allocated in a portfolio choice task
when lotteries are chosen. Risky portfolio choices seem to
involve additional choice criteria such as the relevance of
previous decisions. As a consequence, a potential
portfolio effect has to be related to a non-independent
choice task evaluation solely in risky portfolio choices.
J-28
THE TIME-COURSE OF DEALING WITH MORALLY
OBJECTIONABLE LANGUAGE: WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN WE READ ABOUT BAD STUFF? Marijn E.
Struiksma, Myrto Pantazi, Hannah N.M. De Mulder, Jos. J.A.
van Berkum; UiL OTS, Utrecht University - Language is the
primary mode of expressing our moral opinions - after all,
people talk about what they think is good and bad all the
time: at home, work, in class, church, congress, on the
web, etc. Understanding how value-dependent moral
judgment interacts with the processing of language is thus
important. There is a growing body of evidence regarding
which brain areas respond to moral transgressions, but
little is known about the time-course and nature of the
various sub-processes involved. In previous EEG work,
Van Berkum et al. (2009) compared strict Christian to nonChristian elderly men and reported an early positivity, a
small N400-effect and a late positive potential (LPP)
specific to the reading of attitude-survey statements that
clashed with participants’ moral values. When dealing
with morally loaded language, such as “abortion is
acceptable”, our value system has a direct impact on how
we process the linguistic input. While processing such
statements word-by-word, readers already experience an
affective reaction to the morally loaded initial noun (e.g.
abortion), and consequently build up strong expectations
with respect to plausible upcoming words, expecting the
noun to be modified in line with their personal moral
beliefs (e.g. ‘abortion is unacceptable’ for a pro-lifer, but
‘abortion is acceptable’ for pro-choice individuals). To
determine whether the previously reported N400-effect in
response to morally objectionable statements was similar
to a typical N400-effect and to see whether the tri-phasic
response would generalize from elderly men to students,
we recorded EEG from students while reading morally
loaded attitude-survey statements, as well as factually
correct or incorrect general statements (e.g., “every year
computers get slower\", a world-knowledge violation).
The world-knowledge violation task elicited a typical
N400-effect; the attitude-survey task, in contrast, did not,
suggesting that there was no strong word anticipation
effect in reading morally objectionable statements in our
current group of participants. In line with the previous
study we did observe an early positivity and an LPP (an
effect that is typically elicited by emotionally engaging
stimuli). More specifically, the statements that clashed

with the participant’s moral values were found to elicit a
stronger positivity than the statements that were
consistent with their moral values. The observation of an
LPP effect in the current experiment is thus consistent
with extremely rapid engagement of affective systems
during the processing of language. Additionally, how we
deal with language that opposes our moral values may
well be influenced by personality traits. To examine such
individual differences we correlated the abovementioned
ERP effects with how our participants scored on several
relevant personality questionnaires. A significant
correlation was found with scores on perspective-taking
(PT) as measured by the Interpersonal Reactivity Index
self-report scale. Participants scoring high on PT showed
a greater positivity towards morally objectionable
statements than participants scoring low on PT,
suggesting that the more people are inclined to take other
people’s perspective, the stronger they react to statements
that clash with their values. These results indicate the
importance of considering individual differences when
disentangling how value-dependent moral judgment and
language processing interact.
J-29
IMPAIRED COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL SUCCESS
AMONG
ADULTS
WITH
A
HISTORY
OF
DELIBERATE SELF-HARM: EVIDENCE FROM AN
FMRI STUDY Tchiki S. Davis, University of California,
Berkeley; Daniel Lumian, UCLA; Iris B. Mauss, University of
California, Berkeley; Paree Zarolia, University of Denver; Brett
Q. Ford, University of California, Berkeley; Kateri McRae,
University of Denver - The practice of intentionally hurting
one’s own body without suicidal intent (deliberate selfharm; DSH) is a common, yet poorly understood
behavior. Theories suggest that heightened negative
emotional reactivity and poor emotion regulation are
characteristics of those who engage in DSH. The present
study aimed to build on this research by assessing
negative emotional reactivity and cognitive reappraisal
success (i.e., ability to reframe a situation to reduce its
negative impact) in an fMRI laboratory experiment.
Negative emotional reactivity was assessed by measuring
amygdala activation in response to negative images.
Reappraisal success was assessed by measuring amygdala
and prefrontal activation in response to negative images
for which participants were instructed to use cognitive
reappraisal. Compared to a carefully matched control
group (non-DSH participants who were matched to the
DSH group on demographics, depression, and anxiety
symptoms; n=27), the DSH group (participants with a
history of DSH; n=21) did not exhibit differences in
negative emotional reactivity. However, the DSH group
exhibited less successful down-regulation of amygdala
activation and greater activation in cortical control
regions (e.g., dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and posterior
cingulate) during attempted reappraisal. These results
suggest that DSH is characterized by deficits in cognitive
reappraisal but not heightened negative emotional
reactivity.

J-30
DISTRIBUTION ANALYSIS OF FMRI CONTRASTS
IN SOCIAL AND AFFECTIVE TASKS R. McKell Carter,
Jeff J. MacInnes, Amy Winecoff, R. Alison Adcock, Scott A.
Huettel; Duke University - In order to isolate a specific
aspect of brain function, fMRI researchers compare data
from a complex task with data from a carefully controlled
baseline that differs only in the cognitive process of
interest. For example, to identify neural processes
responsible for emotion regulation, activation during
passive viewing of emotional images may be subtracted
from activation during emotion regulation of similar
images. Nowhere are these comparisons more carefully
constructed than in social and affective neuroscience. In
spite of this effort, social, affective, and motivation
paradigms are designed to study cognitive processes that
are very engaging, meaning, arousal and engagement
often differ substantially between the condition of interest
and its baseline. As a result, large overlapping brain
networks are identified with little specificity to the
cognitive process of interest.
We have previously
shown that regression of whole brain data (distributional
analyses) - based on combinatoric methods for identifying
independent information carried in each brain region -can effectively discriminate social and non-social
processes in game-theoretic decision making. Here, we
used distribution analysis of fMRI to identify factors that
drive the overlapping networks identified in two common
affect and motivation tasks. Using fMRI data from a
previously published monetary incentive delay (MID)
task, we found that an average increase in activation for
the task condition can explain the majority of normally
identified task activations. Using fMRI data from a
previously published emotion regulation task, we find
that the network of brain regions normally associated
with emotional regulation (ER) is also engaged (to a lesser
extent) during passive viewing. We conclude that, for the
MID and ER tasks described here, most activations can be
explained by cognitive processes that are also active
during the baseline condition. Models incorporating these
common effects can be used to isolate brain function
related to the desired process.
J-31
THE INFLUENCE OF VALENCE AND DECISION
DIFFICULTY ON SELF-REFERENTIAL PROCESSING
Harma Meffert, National Institutes of Health; Laura Blanken,
Sophia Children's Hospital; Karina S. Blair, National Institute
of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health; Stuart F.
White, National Institutes of Health; James R. Blair, National
Institutes of Health - Self-referential processing is defined
as the process by which a person becomes aware that
specific contents are related to his or her own self. Cortical
midline structures, such as dorsal and medial prefrontal
cortex, and regions such as inferior frontal cortex, insula
and temporal pole have been implicated in self-referential
processing. However, the specific contribution of each of
these areas is still largely unknown. More particularly, not
many studies have examined the influence of valence and
decision making difficulty on regions involved in selfreferential processing. In this study, participants

evaluated how well personality traits, differing in valence
and decision difficulty, described them or president
Obama. In line with predictions, ventral, rostral and
dorsal parts of medial prefrontal cortex showed greater
activity when participants judged traits about themselves
relative to judging traits about President Obama.
However, none of these regions showed significant
modulation by trait valence. Increasing trait decision
difficulty was associated with increased activity within
dorsal medial prefrontal cortex and bilateral anterior
insula. However, there was very minimal overlap (6/119
voxels, i.e. 5%) of the regions of dorsal medial prefrontal
cortex implicated in self-referential processing and those
implicated in trait decision difficulty. The results are
interpreted within current accounts of self-referential
processing.
J-32
MEASURING
AFFECTIVE
SHARING:
INTERPERSONAL COUPLING OF PHYSIOLOGICAL
SIGNALS IN MINIMAL SOCIAL CONDITIONS Yulia
Golland, Yossi Arzouan, Nava Levit-binnun, IDC Herzliya Extensive research demonstrates that during social
interactions people become coupled to each other in their
behavior and emotions. For example, two people engaged
in conversation were found to synchronize expressions,
vocalizations,
postures,
and
movements
and,
consequently, to become similar in their emotional states.
Moreover, evidence for physiological coupling during
social interaction is also emerging demonstrating that
people enter a state of biologically maintained
interpersonal resonance in which their cerebral activity
shows synchronized dynamical changes (e.g. Hasson et
al., 2011). Here, we investigated if synchronization of
ongoing physiological responses of two co-present
individuals can occur in minimal social conditions, when
there is no direct, face-to-face interaction between them.
For that aim we recorded continuous autonomic activity
(cardiovascular and electrodermal measures) from
participants while they watched emotional movie clips
either alone or in groups of three. This paradigm allowed
us to study physiological responses to identical emotional
stimulation in different social conditions. We expected
that social presence will enhance attunement to the
movie, resulting in more reliable movie driven responses.
Moreover, we hypothesized that participants who shared
both the input (a movie) and the physical presence with
each other (two participants from the same group) will be
more similar in their response dynamics than those who
only shared the input (two participants from different
groups). In accordance with our hypothesis, participants
who watched the movie in groups showed higher acrossgroups synchrony of physiological activity than those
who watched the movie alone. These results suggest that
the presence of other people leads to more robust and
consistent responses to external emotional stimulation.
Remarkably, the physiological coupling of ongoing
autonomic signals was significantly higher between
participants who watched the movie together than
between those who watched the movie with a different
partner, on a different occasion. This difference was
evident for both the cardiovascular and the electrodermal

coupling, which were highly interrelated. We suggest that
the group-specific coupling of dynamic physiological
changes is associated with emotional entrainment of the
co-present individuals, in which minimal facial and
postural cues of others are automatically mimicked,
leading to shared moment-to-moment emotional
experiences. Supporting this suggestion, the level of
physiological
coupling
between
the
co-present
participants was associated with the feeling of collective
experience, reported after the experiment. The results of
the current study demonstrate that co-present individuals
distinctively affect each other’s biological responses to
external stimuli, even without direct, face-to-face
exchanges of verbal and affective information. Moreover,
they suggest that physiological coupling between copresent individuals is one of the biological processes
underlying this phenomenon.
J-33
THE IMPACT OF EARLY ADVERSE CARE AND A
PREVENTIVE INTERVENTION ON PATTERNS OF
NEURAL ACTIVATION DURING A RESPONSE
INHIBITION TASK Kathryn F. Jankowski, University of
Oregon; Kathryn S. Gilliam, University of Oregon; Leslie E.
Roos, University of Oregon; Jennifer H. Pfeifer, University of
Oregon; Phillip A. Fisher, University of Oregon, Oregon Social
Learning Center; Jacqueline Bruce, Oregon Social Learning
Center - Maltreated children in foster care commonly
experience a range of early adverse experiences, including
neglectful and/or abusive care and caregiver instability.
These events are commonly linked with negative
behavioral and neurological outcomes, including
increased externalizing and internalizing behaviors,
cognitive and emotional deficits, and impaired
neurological
and
neurobiological
development.
Importantly, recent studies suggest that early
interventions may ameliorate these negative effects. The
current study investigated the impact of early adverse
care and a family-based preventive intervention,
Multidimensional Treatment Foster Care for Preschoolers
(MTFC-P), on neural patterns associated with a response
inhibition task during late childhood/early adolescence.
Participants included 36 children, ages 9-14 years old: 11
foster care children who received MTFC-P (MTFC-P; 4
males; M = 12.02 years), 11 foster care children who
received treatment services as usual (RFC; 5 males; M =
12.22 years), and 14 low-income, non-maltreated
community comparisons (CC; 7 males; M = 11.81 years).
Groups did not differ significantly on age or gender.
Participants completed an event-related fMRI Go/NoGo
task that measured the ability to respond to frequent
target Go stimuli and inhibit prepotent responses to
infrequent NoGo stimuli. The task consisted of two runs
with 260 events per run. Imaging data were acquired
using a Siemens Allegra 3T, head-only MRI scanner and
preprocessed and analyzed using SPM8. At the fixed
effects level, planned linear contrasts were created for
each participant for three trial types (correct Go trials,
correct NoGo trials, and incorrect NoGo trials) compared
to an implicit baseline. Regressors of no interest included
incorrect Go trials, six rigid body realignment parameters,
and trials characterized by major motion artefacts.

Repeated measures ANOVAs were calculated at the
random effects level, where trial type was the withinsubjects factor and group was the between-subjects factor.
For this presentation, we examined group differences
associated with successful response inhibition (correct
NoGo trials) relative to successful responding (correct Go
trials). While task accuracy was similar across groups,
there were significant group differences on neural
patterns of activity in frontal, temporal, parietal, and
subcortical regions. MTFC-P recruited greater frontal
regions (medial and superior frontal gyrus and
claustrum) and reduced periamygdala compared to CC,
while RFC recruited reduced middle temporal gyrus,
precuneus, thalamus, and hippocampus compared to CC.
In addition, MTFC-P recruited greater lingual
gyrus/occipital cortex compared to RFC. While frontal
regions are primarily recruited during response inhibition
and error processing, research also supports the role of
temporal and posterior parietal (including precuneus)
recruitment in error processing and inhibitory control
preparation, as well as subcortical (e.g., amygdala,
thalamus) recruitment in salience detection and impulse
control. From these results, two important conclusions
should be considered (1) Experiencing adverse care
during early childhood is associated with atypical neural
patterns
underlying
response
inhibition,
error
monitoring,
and
salience
detection
in
late
childhood/early adolescence; (2) Preventive intervention
may be associated with distinct neural patterns
supporting successful response inhibition. Additional
research is necessary to further characterize these distinct
neural profiles, as well as examine their association with
executive functioning more broadly, as well as
externalizing and internalizing behaviors.
J-34
NEURAL
BASES
UNDERLYING
COGNITIVE
REGULATION OF FOOD CRAVING IN CHILDHOOD
AND ADOLESCENCE Insel C, Columbia University;
Silvers JA, Columbia University; Powers A, Weill Cornell
Medical College; Casey BJ, Weill Cornell Medical College;
Mischel W, Columbia University; Ochsner KN, Columbia
University - With childhood obesity on the rise, it is crucial
to understand how children and adolescents respond to
food cues, as these responses guide health-related
decision making on a daily basis. Behavioral and
neuroimaging experiments have shown that children and
adolescents show more neural and behavioral reactivity
to appetitive cues than adults. However no prior work
has examined the neural processes underlying cognitive
regulation of craving across development. In the present
study children and adolescents age 6-18 completed a task
designed to examine cognitive regulation of craving for
food while whole-brain functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) data were collected. The task involved
looking at pictures of appetizing foods on two types of
trials. On “Close” trials, participants imagined that the
pictured food was directly in front of them and focused
on its appetitive features (e.g., taste, smell). On “Far”
trials, participants down-regulated their appetitive desire
by imagining that the food was further away and focusing
on its basic visual features (e.g., color, shape). After

viewing each stimulus in the instructed manner,
participants used a 1-5 scale to indicate how much they
wanted to eat the food that they had just viewed.
Behavioral results showed that, overall, participants
reported less craving on Far than on Close trials and
could thus successfully regulate craving. Neuroimaging
results demonstrated that on Far trials relative to Close
trials, participants showed attenuated recruitment of
reward-related circuitry, including the ventral striatum
and ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Across development,
age was associated with decreased self-reported craving,
such that adolescents reported wanting the food less
during Close and Far conditions. Moreover, for both
Close and Far conditions, age was associated with
attenuated activation in the ventral striatum, suggesting
that adolescents show less reward-related reactivity to
food cues than children. Together, these findings suggest
that behavioral and neural responses to food craving and
regulation change across development.
J-35
BENEFITS OF EXPRESSIVE WRITING THROUGH
INCIDENTAL EMOTION REGULATION Jared B. Torre,
UCLA; Tristen K. Inagaki, UCLA; Catherine M. Mulvenna,
Yale; Kate E.B. Haltom, UCLA; Andrea Niles, UCLA; Annette
L. Stanton, UCLA; Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA - When
individuals experience chronic or acute distress, the act of
seeing a therapist, talking with supportive others, or
writing in a journal can each have substantial
psychological benefits. Two decades of social and clinical
psychological research on expressive writing have
empirically documented that a small number of brief
expressive writing sessions, focused on the source of
one’s distress can produce demonstrable mental and
physical health benefits over the course of several months.
Although a number of mechanisms have been proposed
over the years, none have garnered widespread support.
We have previously proposed that the simply act of
putting feelings into words (or “affect labeling”) is itself a
form of unintentional emotion regulation that serves to
diminish distress by dampening limbic responses and the
physiological correlates that typically parallel limbic
activity. Affect labeling is associated with increased
activity in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC),
diminished amygdala activity, and diminished selfreported distress, similar to the pattern of effects observed
during intentional emotion regulation strategies such as
reappraisal. In the present research, we tested the
relationship between expressive writing and two emotion
regulation strategies, affect labeling and reappraisal,
through the use of fMRI and an expressive writing
intervention. Reappraisal has previously been suggested
as one of the major mechanisms through which
expressive writing is able to confer its health benefits,
though we propose that the incidental form of emotion
regulation of affect labeling may be a more substantial
component of this mechanism. During an initial session,
subjects performed both affect labeling and reappraisal
via established task paradigms in the MRI scanner and
answered questionnaires assessing clinically-relevant
individual difference variables (such as a physical health
symptomatology checklist). Subjects then engaged in four

expressive writing sessions (or four control task writing
sessions) over the following four weeks and were given a
3 month follow-up to observe mental and physical health
benefits. A whole-brain conjunction analysis of the
neuroimaging data acquired at the baseline time point
demonstrated significant overlapping activations for the
two emotion regulation tasks, affect labeling and
reappraisal (p < .001, k = 20), particularly in the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex. However, we were also
able to run a within-subject correlation of ROI parameter
estimates taken from the VLPFC which showed a strong
relationship (r = .35; p<.001) across the emotion regulation
tasks. Finally, an additional whole-brain analysis was run
to observe the relationship between the neural responses
on these tasks with the clinically-relevant individual
difference variables assessed at both pre- and postintervention. Modeling the interaction term between
group membership (intervention vs. control) and a
physical health symptomatology checklist improvement
(calculated as post- minus pre-intervention score) showed
bilateral VLPFC activations as significant in the affect
labeling task (p<.005, k=43; r=.34 for intervention; r =-.31
for controls). No significant activations were revealed in
the reappraisal task. These findings suggest that despite
the amount of neural overlap between affect labeling and
reappraisal, affect labeling in particular predicts better
health improvements via an expressive writing
intervention and is likely a major component of the
mechanic that confers these benefits.
J-36
UNDERSTANDING
MOTIVATION-RELATED
CHANGES IN ATTENTIONAL FLEXIBILITY: A
NEURAL NETWORKS APPROACH Rebecca D. Calcott,
Elliot T. Berkman; University of Oregon - Motivational states
play an important role in tuning our attention to facilitate
goal pursuit. Importantly, the most beneficial type of
attention can vary depending on the context. Although
several studies have examined how motivation affects
attentional breadth (i.e., the broadness vs. narrowness of
one’s attentional focus), less is known about how
approach and avoidance motivation affect one’s ability to
flexibly shift his/her attention to match situational
demands. The current studies examined how approach
and avoidance motivation affect the flexibility of
attentional breadth, using both behavioral and fMRI
measures. In these studies, participants completed a
modified version of Navon composite letter task in which
the ratio of global to local targets was varied by block.
Thus, on some blocks, it was beneficial to adopt a global
attentional focus (mostly global blocks), on others a local
attentional focus was most adaptive (mostly local blocks),
and in the control condition, both types of attention were
equally beneficial (even blocks). Approach, avoidance,
and neutral motivational states were manipulated withinsubjects using pictures and embodied arm positions. Two
indices were used to operationalize attentional flexibility:
context sensitivity, which is the degree to which
participants shifted their attentional bias to be consistent
with the block (long timescale), and switch costs, which
reflect the speed with which participants can shift their
attentional focus on a trial-by-trial basis (short timescale).

Behavioral results (N=101) showed that motivational
states have complex effects on attentional flexibility.
Avoidance motivation led to increased context sensitivity
on mostly global blocks, whereas approach led to reduced
switch costs on mostly global blocks. Thus, avoidance
motivation led people to adapt their attention to the level
that is most beneficial in the context, at the cost of
increased switch costs when less expected stimuli occur.
Approach motivation, on the other hand, led to attention
that does not adapt as much to the context, but is more
open to unexpected stimuli. In order to investigate the
neural mechanisms underlying these findings, another
group of participants completed the same task while their
brains were scanned using fMRI. Preliminary block-level
analyses (N=10) suggest that across different block types,
avoidance motivation led to greater activation in medial
prefrontal (mPFC) regions compared to approach. This
finding may suggest that mPFC activation is one route by
which avoidance states enhance sensitivity to contextual
information. Subsequent event-related analyses will
examine the degree to which approach and avoidance
motivation engage neural default and task-related
networks while responding to global and local targets
across different contexts. These findings will help clarify
the mechanisms that underlie motivation-related changes
in attentional flexibility.
J-37
CROSS-CONTEXT INFLUENCES: GAINS AND
LOSSES IN SOCIAL STATUS AFFECT FINANCIAL
RISK TAKING Vincent C. Schoots, Erasmus University
Rotterdam, Radboud University Nijmegen; Maarten A.S.
Boksem, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Radboud University
Nijmegen; Alan G. Sanfey, Radboud University Nijmegen; Ale
Smidts, Erasmus University Rotterdam - Different rewards
(i.e. money, food, sex, social inclusion) are encoded
similarly by the brain, which can potentially lead to spillover effects. Here, we find that gains and losses in a social
status context can directly impact subsequent financial
risk-taking. In a behavioral experiment, participants
competed with two others on a simple task. On each
round of the game they could either win or lose, thus
impacting their competitive rank. This game alternated
with a financial choice, always between a sure gain and a
risky gamble. The subjective expected utility of the
gamble was matched to the sure option for each
individual, such that we expected participants to gamble
on 50% of the trials; however, participants gambled on
only 38%. Players in the top rank (high social status)
gambled more after wins, while players in bottom rank
(low social status) gambled more after losses (interaction
[status*win/loss]). Thus, subjects gambled more (i.e.
behaved in the expected direction) when the status-quo
was maintained in the social status game. Subsequently,
we tested 29 males in an fMRI experiment, using the same
paradigm. We observed activity in midline visual cortex,
cingulate cortex, and bilateral insula when decisions
followed the status-quo, suggesting a role for attention
and conflict monitoring. We propose that attention is
shifted from the status game to the gambling task during
these status-quo trials. While people might base their
decision on gut-feeling during low attention, higher

attention to the choice options allows for choices more in
line with individuals’ reasoned risk preferences.
J-38
THREAT, PAIN, AND BRAIN - THE EFFECTS OF
FEAR AND ANXIETY ON THE PERCEPTION OF
PAIN Matthias J. Wieser, University of Würzburg; Philipp
Reicherts, University of Würzburg; Antje. B.M. Gerdes,
University of Mannheim; Andreas Mühlberger, University of
Regensburg; Stefan M. Schulz, University of Würzburg; Paul
Pauli, University of Würzburg - It has demonstrated that
pain processing is influenced by emotions such that
negative emotions increase pain perception. With regard
to anxiety, it has been proposed that fear (phasic) and
anxiety (tonic) are probably different aversive affective
states. In this distinction, fear is characterized by an
aversive reaction to the perception of a specific threat
stimulus, whereas anxiety is defined by prolonged
vigilance to a diffuse, unspecific threat. Moreover, the
predictability of upcoming aversive events during fearful
anticipation is a key feature for the distinction between
transient phasic and sustained tonic fear. It has been
proposed that fear versus anxiety might also lead to
distinct processing of sensory threatening events. For
example, fear and anxiety might have different effects on
pain perception with higher pain sensitivity under
anxiety, but lower pain sensitivity under fear. These
potential differences were investigated by comparing
conditioned fear (CF/fear), where the threat is
predictable, and instructed fear (IF/anxiety), where the
imminent threat is unpredictable. Forty-five participants
(CF n=23; IF n=22) received thermal pain stimuli while
watching cues indicating threat or safety. Before this test
phase, the CF group underwent classical fear conditioning
with visual cues either predicting threat (aversive electric
stimulus) or safety, whereas the IF group was only
verbally instructed about these contingencies but actually
never received a shock. Pain and cue ratings, skin
conductance level (SCL) and BOLD responses (fMRI) to
the cues and the thermal pain stimuli were obtained in the
test phase. Cue ratings showed successful threat
induction and the SCL was higher in response to threat
compared to safety cues in both groups. In addition,
affective pain ratings in later threat compared to safety
trials were increased in the instructed fear group, only.
BOLD analysis for IF revealed that threat compared to
safety cues elicited higher activation in visual and fearrelated areas. For CF, the activity pattern was similar but
less pronounced. An interaction of pain and threat
revealed higher sensory and threat-related activity in IF,
whereas in CF activity increase was restricted to fearrelated areas. Results demonstrate increased subjective
and neurophysiological pain processing during instructed
fear, in line with theories proposing heightened attention
and sensory sensitivity during anxiety. However, fearrelated analgesia was not found in the fear conditioning
group. The latter finding might indicate that fear
conditioning did not elicit elevated levels of arousal
probably necessary for analgesic effects.

J-39
DISTINCT EFFECTS OF VISUAL AND AURAL INPUT
ON NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF SELF-REFLECTION
OF SOCIAL ATTRIBUTES Yina Ma, Peking University,
Dartmouth College; Shihui Han, Peking University - The
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) activity related to selfreflection on personality traits is modality specific ‚Äî
being involved when reflecting on visually but not aurally
presented trait adjectives in sighted people. As our recent
research found that self-reflection on social attributes
induced greater activity in the mPFC, precuneus and
bilateral temporoparietal junction (TPJ), the current work
tested whether all these brain regions involved in selfreferential processing are similarly affected by sensory
input. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we
scanned 23 sighted young adults during judgments of
social attributes of oneself and a familiar other. The items
for judgments were presented on a screen or through a
headset. We found that self- vs. other-judgments
significantly activated the mPFC, precuneus and bilateral
TPJ when stimuli were visually presented. When stimuli
were presented aurally, however, self- vs. otherjudgments only activated the bilateral TPJ. Direct
comparison between the neural activities in response to
visually and aurally presented stimuli showed that the
mPFC activity was stronger in response to self- vs. otherjudgments on visually compared to aurally presented
stimuli, whereas the TPJ activation did not differ between
the visual and aural modalities. Together with our
previous
findings,
we
demonstrate
that
selfrepresentation of both mental and social attributes in the
mPFC is specific to visual modality. In contrast, the TPJ
activity that is engaged in representation of one's own
social attributes and others' mental states is not sensitive
to sensory input in sighted adults. Thus different brain
regions involved in self-referential processing are not
affected by sensory experiences in a similar vein.
J-40
SPECIFICITY TO EMOTION AND ANIMACY:
NEURAL RESPONSE TO THREATENING AND
ANIMATE STIMULI Stuart F. White, National Institute of
Mental Health, NIH; Christopher J. Adalio, University of
California, Berkeley; R. James Blair, National Institute of
Mental Health, NIH - Background: There is considerable
apparent overlap in the regions that process emotional
stimuli and those involved in social cognition, specifically
those processing animate stimuli, including amygdala,
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and temporal
cortices. It could be argued that this overlap at least
partially represents a bias for processing animate stimuli
because animate stimuli are more likely to become
associated with threat than non-animate stimuli (c.f. Yang
et al., under revision); however, emotional and animate
stimuli have rarely been directly contrasted. Based on
previous work, it was predicted that vmPFC (Gobbini et
al, 2011) and amygdala (Yang et al, under review; Zald,
2003) would show responses to both emotional and
animate stimuli, medial fusiform cortex would
preferentially respond to inanimate stimuli (Gobbini et al
2011; Mahon et al, 2007) and superior temporal gyrus

would preferentially respond to animate stimuli
(Beauchamp et al, 2002; Gobbini et al, 2011). Methods:
Twenty-two right-handed, healthy adults (12 female)
viewed threatening or neutral images that could be either
animate (facial expressions) or inanimate (objects) in the
context of a dot probe task while undergoing fMRI.
Results: A 2 (Emotion: Negative, Neutral) x 2 (Animacy:
Animate, Inanimate) x 2 (Congruence: Congruent,
Incongruent) ANOVA was conducted on the subjects’
BOLD responses within the amygdala, fusiform, STG and
vmPFC ROIs. Main effects of emotion and animacy
indicated increased response to animate and threatening
stimuli within the amygdala. Main effects of emotion and
animacy were also seen in fusiform cortex, though in nonoverlapping regions. The regions of fusiform cortex
showing significant main effects for emotion were slightly
anterior and lateral to those showing significant main
effects for animacy. Notably within the regions of
fusiform cortex showing significant main effects of
animacy, there was significant modulation by emotion
but only for objects, not faces [left: objects: t(21)=3.802,
p=0.001; faces: t(21)=.758, p=.46; right: objects: t(21)=2.663,
p=0.015; faces: t(21)=.831, p=.42]. Only the inanimate
independent t test (threatening objects vs. neutral objects)
revealed significantly greater BOLD responses to
threatening objects relative to neutral objects within
medial fusiform gyrus (p<0.02). There was a main effect
of animacy within bilateral STG, but no significant main
effect of emotion. However, there was a significant
emotion-by-animacy interaction in a slightly more
superior region of STG. Within this region, the response
to neutral objects was significantly less than the response
to both neutral faces and negative objects [t(21)=3.99 &
3.73, p=.001 & .002 respectively]. There was a main effect
of animacy within vmPFC. However, there was no
significant main effect of emotion or any interaction with
emotion within this region. Conclusions: The current
data suggest the amygdala is responsive to both
emotional and animate stimuli.
Furthermore, there
appears to be category specific enhancement of
responsivity by threat information in temporal cortex.
Finally, while the absence of vmPFC response to
emotional information may be type II error, it may
indicate that previously reported vmPFC activity to
emotional stimuli is a result of differences in stimulus
differences in animacy and/or task instructions
encouraging greater self-relevant processing of emotional
stimuli.
J-41
FACE
THE
HIERARCHY:
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS AND ALPHA SUPPRESSION ELICITED
BY FACES EMBEDDED IN A HIERARCHICAL
CONTEXT Audrey Breton, Cerveau et Cognition; Karim Jerbi,
Lyon Neuroscience Research Center (LNRC); Marie-Anne
Henaff, LNRC; Anne Cheylus, Cerveau et Cognition; Jean-Yves
Baudouin, Université de Bourgogne; Christina Schmitz,
LNRC, Pierre Krolak-Salmon, LNRC; Jean-Baptiste Van der
Henst, Cerveau et Cognition - Living in a sophisticated
social environment is cognitively more demanding than
living alone. A growing body of neuroscience studies
argues that a major evolutionary force that shapes the

brain of primates is the complexity of the social
environment. In this framework, hierarchy stands out as a
key feature that contributes to such complexity. A large
proportion of primates’ social relationships are indeed
asymmetrical and humans are no exception. In order to
navigate their social world, individuals need to recognize
hierarchical relationships. Although recent neuroimaging
studies have identified some of the brain structures
involved in the processing of hierarchical stimuli, the
temporal dynamics of the neural response associated with
such processing remains unknown. The present study
explores this issue by investigating both the event-related
potentials and the alpha oscillatory activity elicited by
facial stimuli embedded in a hierarchical context.
Hierarchy was manipulated by presenting neutralexpression faces in a game setting, where participants
were confronted to other players represented by their
photographs. They had to rank their performance with
respect to other players. The EEG signal was then
recorded while participants were presented with highrank, middle-rank and low-rank faces and had to answer
a question concerning the hierarchical position of each
face compared to their own position.
The purpose of
the present study is twofold. First, we sought to
determine whether the hierarchical context modulates the
early structural processing of faces, indexed by the N170
event-related and/or whether context influences a higherorder cognitive processing stage, indexed by later
potentials, such as the late positive potentials (LPPs)
reported
in
social
categorization
and
in
motivational/attentional commitment. Second, we also
investigated the putative involvement of alpha (9-12 Hz)
oscillations to better characterize the cortical processes
related to hierarchical faces.
Three main findings
emerge from the study. First, the experimental
manipulation had no effect on the early N170 component,
which suggests that hierarchy did not influence the
structural encoding of neutral-expression faces. Second,
hierarchy significantly modulated the amplitude of the
late positive potentials (LPPs) within a 400-700 ms timewindow; with high-rank faces elicited the largest LPP
amplitude compared to middle or low-rank faces. A
higher status is socially and evolutionarily more desirable
than a lower status and cognitive resources are thus likely
to be allocated to high-status information. The higher LPP
amplitude observed for highest-rank faces may thus
reflect an attentional and motivational commitment.
Third, high-rank faces were associated with the highest
reduction of alpha power. It has been proposed that alpha
synchronization is a way to neutralize task-irrelevant
regions, while alpha desynchronization indicates a greater
engagement of the regions affected by this suppression.
According to this view, greater alpha suppression
observed for the highest-rank faces would reflect a greater
allocation of cognitive resources to these stimuli. Taken
together these findings provide novel electrophysiological
evidence for enhanced allocation of attentional resource in
the presence of high-rank faces. At a broader level, this
study brings new insights into the neural processing
underlying social categorization.

J-42
ENTORHINAL
AND
PARAHIPPOCAMPAL
INTEGRITY DETERMINE THE SUBJECTIVE TIME
HORIZON FOR NOVELTY EXPLORATION IN OLD
AGE Sandra Duezel, Max-Planck Institute for Human
Developement; Ulman Lindenberger, Max-Planck Institute for
Human Developement; Emrah Duezel, German Centre of
Neurodegenerative Diseases - There is growing consensus
that lifestyle factors such as physical exercise, cognitive
and social enrichment and nutrition influence cognitive
abilities and brain structure in old age. However it is
largely unknown which mechanisms drive the motivation
to engage in an active lifestyle, that involves physical
activity and exploring novelty changes, in old age. We
developed a new questionnaire, the “subjective health
horizon” (SHH), which captures the time horizon within
which individuals can imagine being able and motivated
to lead an active and exploratory lifestyle. We propose
that the SHH is an important source of motivation
towards an active and exploratory life.
The SHHquestionnaire contains 30 questions assessing individual
estimates of future health-expectation and physical
performance within an age-adjusted time dimension. The
items focus on physical time perspectives, performancerelated perspectives, future-planning perspectives and
novelty and exploratory perspectives. We collected the
SHH-questionnaire from 74 healthy older participants
originating from two different studies (mean age=70,1
years; 44 female) together with other measures of health
and wellbeing, motivation as well as other time
perspectives. For all participants a structural brain
imaging data set was available. We first determined how
the time perspectives to different questions cluster. A
factor analysis revealed three main factors accounting for
37,5%; 14,8% and 7,9% (sum 60,2 %) of the total variance
respectively. The first component included items
accessing physical time perspectives. Items assessing
novelty and exploratory perspectives loaded on the
second component and the third component comprised
items measuring performance-related perspectives. We
observed that time perspectives were shortest scored for
the novelty-driven component (2). In a second step we
determined whether the main time perspectives for the
components were correlated with the cortical thickness a
priory defined brain regions. We focused on the frontal
poles, precuneus and hippocampus, entorhinal cortex and
parahippocampal regions. These regions are components
of the episodic memory network, which is functionally
associated with future thinking. Gray matter volumes
were automatically extracted from native space using
FreeSurfer (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/). We
found a highly significant relationship between left
entorhinal (p <0.02) and parahippocampal volume (p
<0.00) and for the time perspective related to novelty and
exploratory (component 2) only. This relationship is still
existent when controlling for age and body-mass-index.
Interestingly the novelty and exploratory time
perspectives (component 2) were not associated with
novelty seeking. None of the other relationships were
significant. These findings suggest that the integrity of
entorhinal and parahippocampal regions is associated
with the subjective future perspective to engage in

novelty-related behaviors. Thus, the integrity of these
regions may determine how much exposure to novelty
older individuals may experience. Furthermore these
aspects the SHH questionnaire appear to be sensitive to
the integrity of regions that are affected early in the
course of Alzheimer’s disease.
J-43
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
EMPATHY
DEVELOPMENT DURING EARLY ADOLESCENCE
John C. Flournoy, William E. Moore III, Sanjay Srivastava,
John C. Mazziotta, Marco Iacoboni, Mirella Dapretto, Jennifer
H. Pfeifer During early adolescence, there is considerable
development and refinement of social cognitive abilities,
and specifically empathy, that is crucial for successful
social functioning. Adolescents also make gains in two
areas that may support this increase in empathy: the
ability to regulate emotions and to take the perspective of
others. Theoretical models suggest that the ability to
empathize begins with affective resonance, defined as a
vicarious emotional response that mirrors that of another
person. Affective resonance, however, can lead to either a
concerned, sympathetic response called empathic concern
(EC), or to a self-focused, distressed response called
personal distress (PD). Previous research shows that
during adolescence, emotion regulation improves, EC
increases, and PD decreases. While increased emotion
regulation is associated with decreases in PD, there
appears to be no effect of increased emotion regulation on
EC. Additionally, perspective taking is positively
correlated with EC and negatively correlated with PD.
Prior research clearly identifies key regions of interest that
are likely to play a role in each of these processes. Certain
brain regions are active during both the observation and
imitation of emotions, and have therefore been
interpreted as an affective resonance system, including
the mirror neuron system, anterior insula, and amygdala.
In prior research, the degree of activation in this network
during an imitation/observation task has been correlated
with measures of both PD and EC, which suggests that
both make use of this system. Additionally, regions that
support emotion regulation and perspective taking may
modulate this network to elicit changes in EC and PD. We
hypothesized that during adolescence, increases in EC
and PD would be associated with increased activations in
regions implicated in affective resonance during
observation of emotional faces. Moreover, decreases in
personal distress would be associated with activity
increases in regions implicated in perspective taking
and/or in emotion regulation. 38 participants, at two
timepoints (age 10 and 13), observed affective facial
expressions during fMRI. Stimuli were full-color, wholeface images comprising 16 diverse individuals (8 male, 8
female) making 5 different emotional expressions (angry,
fearful, happy, neutral, or sad). Participants also
completed the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI), which
includes subscales measuring EC and PD. Regions of
interest were determined a priori from topical metaanalyses that use a multi-level kernel density approach.
Results from growth curve and cross-lagged models will
be discussed.

J-44
NEURAL ACTIVITY PREDICTS BOX OFFICE
PERFORMANCE OF MAINSTREAM FILMS Benjamin
C. Gunter, Locke Welborn, Stephanie Vezich, Matthew D.
Lieberman; UCLA - Neural response to persuasive stimuli
has been previously shown to predict future change in
population-level behavior more accurately than selfreport alone. We scanned participants while they viewed
full-length trailers advertising unreleased films from
several genres. Preliminary analyses reveal that measures
of population-level behavior including box-office
performance and critical reception are indexed linearly by
activity in several regions of the brain, including medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC), measured in a subject group months before the
release of the films. Results will contribute to a framework
for neural models predicting a variety of real-world
events beyond the capacity of self-report by laymen and
even experts.
J-45
THE EFFECT OF INFLAMMATION ON THE
AMYGDALA’S
RESPONSE
TO
SOCIALLY
THREATENING IMAGES Tristen K. Inagaki, UCLA,
*SANS Graduate Student Travel Award Winner; Keely A.
Muscatell, UCLA; Michael R. Irwin, Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, Cousins Center for
Psychoneuroimmunology, UCLA; Steve W. Cole, Semel
Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, Cousins
Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, University of California
Los Angeles School of Medicine, Los Angeles AIDS Institute,
The Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA; Naomi I.
Eisenberger, UCLA - Everyone has had the unpleasant
experience of being sick.
In addition to physical
symptoms such as headache and fever, a major symptom
of sickness is social withdrawal. However, the
mechanisms associated with this behavioral change
remain unclear. In animals, the amygdala is a key neural
region involved in sickness-induced social withdrawal.
Consistent with this, in humans, heightened amygdala
activity to negative social cues is associated with social
avoidance tendencies. Based on these findings, the current
investigation explored the effect of an experimentally
induced inflammatory challenge (endotoxin) on
amygdala activity to socially threatening and
nonthreatening images. To the extent that inflammatory
activity increases social withdrawal by heightening
amygdala activity, we hypothesized that endotoxin vs.
placebo would lead to increased amygdala activity to
socially threatening images vs. other types of images. We
also explored how amygdala activity was related to
feelings of social disconnection in participants made to
feel sick. In a between-subject design, thirty-nine
participants were randomly assigned to receive either
placebo
or
endotoxin, which
safely
increases
inflammatory activity. Self-reported feelings of social
disconnection and physical sickness symptoms were
assessed at 7 hourly time points as well as proinflammatory cytokines via blood draws. Two hours postinjection when inflammatory activity is at its peak,
participants underwent an fMRI scan to assess the

amygdala’s response to socially threatening images (fear
faces), non-socially threatening images (guns), socially
non-threatening images (happy faces), and non-social,
non-threatening images (household objects).
As
hypothesized, endotoxin led to greater amygdala activity
in response to socially threatening vs. all other types of
images. No such differences were found for placebo
participants. Additionally, increased amygdala activity in
endotoxin participants during the viewing of socially vs.
non-socially threatening images was associated with
increased feelings of social disconnection (from baseline
to 2 hours post-injection) even after controlling for selfreported physical sickness symptoms. These findings
highlight the amygdala as a neural region that may be
important for sickness-induced social withdrawal.
J-46
FEEDBACK-RELATED NEGATIVITY AND REWARD
SENSITIVITY PREDICT SPONTANEOUS CHEATING
BEHAVIOR Xiaoqing Hu, Northwestern University; Narun
Pornpattananangkul,
Northwestern
University;
Ellen
Reynolds, Columbia University; Robin Nusslock, Northwestern
University - Previous studies that examined the neural
correlates of deception usually omitted two important
factors: the voluntary intention to deceive and the
individual differences regarding reward sensitivity in
deception. Here, we recorded event-related potentials
(ERPs)
in
18
participants
to
examine
the
neurophysiological processes underlying spontaneous
cheating in a coin-guess task in which participants may
win monetary incentive by misreporting their prediction
of the coin-flips. Moreover, we measured participants’
Behavioral Inhibition System and Behavioral Activation
System using BIS/BAS questionnaires to assess the
influence of participants’ motivational systems on
spontaneous cheating behavior. Results showed
participants were generally honest: no significant
differences between the opportunity to cheat and no
opportunity to cheat condition regarding cumulative
monetary outcome and accuracy. Nonetheless, the
feedback-related negativity (FRN) following the coin-flip
outcomes were more negative during the opportunity to
cheat than the no-opportunity to cheat condition (F(1,
17)=7.56, p<.02). Moreover, the larger FRNs in the
opportunity condition than the no-opportunity condition,
the more likely participants were going to cheat (r=-.51,
p<.05). This enlarged FRN during the opportunity to
cheat condition suggested that participants were more
motivated to evaluate the outcome of the coin-flip when
they have a chance to gain incentives by cheating. This
signal may guide participants’ actual behavior toward
cheating so as to increase their gains. Regarding one’s
self-report of BIS/BAS, we found that only the BAS
Reward subscale (but not Drive, Fun Seeking or BIS) was
positively correlated with one’s potential cheating
behavior (r=.65, p<.01). Specifically, the higher the BAS
Reward scores, the more participants would claim to win
during the opportunity to cheat condition than during the
no opportunity to cheat condition. This demonstrated that
participants with higher level of reward sensitivity may
be more likely to cheat when incentives were present.
Finally, the FRN and the BAS Reward subscale were not

correlated with each other (r=-.169, p>.2), suggesting
these two indicators may represent unique psychological
processes during the spontaneous cheating behavior. A
regression model including both the FRN and BAS
Reward accounted for 58.2% of variance in predicting
participants’ possible cheating behavior, and both FRN
and BAS Reward scores were independent predictors of
cheating.
This
study
provides
the
first
electrophysiological evidence in predicting one’s
spontaneous cheating behavior when confronting
incentives and has important implications for
understanding between FRN and reward sensitivity in
predicting cheating behavior.
J-47
SELF-CONSTRUAL
PRIMING
MODULATES
NEURAL RESPONSE TO OWN VS. FRIENDS’
REWARDS Zhenhao Shi, Michael E. W. Varnum, Xi Liu,
Shihui Han; Peking University - The neural circuitry of
reward, primarily the ventral striatum, has been shown to
encode both one’s own rewards and others’ rewards
(Mobbs et al., 2009; Tabibnia et al., 2008). However,
culture has been shown to affect people’ motivation when
their performance is linked to rewards for the self or close
others, and this effect appears to be linked to differences
in how the self is construed (Kitayama & Park, 2012). In
the present study we sought to test whether manipulating
self-construal would shift neural representations of
monetary reward for the self versus a close friend.
Fifteen subjects (age = 19-24, 10 female, after excluding 4
subjects with excessive head motion) participated in the
present study. The study involved playing a cardguessing game in which correct guesses led to monetary
rewards and incorrect guesses led to losses. A square or a
rhombus indicated on each trial that the subject had won
or lost either for herself or her friend (SELF/FRND).
There was also a neutral condition where the letter “N”
was on the cards and no win or loss followed the guesses.
Subjects were scanned using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) while they played the game in
two sessions. In one session, each run was immediately
preceded by independent self-construal priming (IND); in
the other session, each run was preceded by
interdependent self-construal priming (INT). Each
priming procedure consisted of 16 sentences. For IND
priming, subjects judged whether an independent
pronoun (e.g., ‘I’, ‘mine’) was present in each sentence; for
INT priming, they judged the presence of interdependent
pronouns (e.g., ‘we’, ‘ours’). Another sample of 16
subjects (age = 18-25, 9 female) participated in a localizer
study to pre-localize the loci of bilateral ventral striatum
that encode monetary reward in Chinese. Subjects were
scanned while playing the same game used in the main
study, except that they played only for themselves and no
priming was administered. The left and right ventral
striatum (lVStr and rVStr) were activated by win versus
loss in the localizer study (x/y/z = -12/5/-8 & 12/8/-8).
The regions were defined as regions of interests for the
main study and their contrast values of win versus loss
were subjected to a 2x2 MANOVA involving IND/INT
and SELF/FRND. We found a reliable interaction of the
two factors (Pillai’s Trace = 0.49, p < 0.02). Univariate tests

showed that the interaction was significant for rVStr
(F(1,14) = 12.01, p < 0.005). Pairwise comparisons
confirmed the stronger activity of rVStr for SELF than for
FRND after IND priming (t(14) = 2.29, p < 0.05), and
weaker for SELF than for FRND after INT priming (t(14) =
-1.91, p = 0.077). The lVStr also displayed a similar
interaction (F(1,14) = 7.02, p < 0.02) despite the fact that
pairwise differences were significant (t(14) = 1.44 & -1.29,
ps > 0.1). These results demonstrate that the neural
representation of vicarious reward is dynamic and
sensitive to cultural values. Whereas interdependent selfconstrual
priming
heightens
vicarious
reward,
independent self-construal priming decreases it.
J-48
EXAMINING THE ROLE OF BELIEF IN AUTOMATIC
IMITATION Elizabeth Evans; Emma Gowen; Ellen Poliakoff;
University of Manchester - The passive perception of the
actions of others can have an effect on the execution on
one’s own actions, known as ‘automatic imitation’, which
is typically stronger for biological as opposed to nonbiological stimuli. For example, when pressing a button,
reaction times are faster when performed whilst
observing a finger depression (compatible action) and
slower whilst observing a finger lift (incompatible action).
Automatic imitation is thought to represent a controlled
laboratory model of the well-known spontaneous motor
mimicry of actions, observed in naturalistic social
situations. Imitation is typically reduced or absent whilst
observing an object movement as opposed to a human
movement. However, the strength of this “human bias”
appears to be modulated by top-down factors, such as
belief (Stanley et al., 2007, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 33, 915926). For example, if a participant believes that an object
movement was generated by a human movement,
stronger automatic imitation effects may be generated
than if a participant has no human belief about the origin
of the stimulus. In Experiment 1, participants were
presented with pure blocks of stimuli in the following
sequence: object, hand, object, and finally object (after
being told that the object movement was generated by the
human hand movement).
However, the belief
manipulation had the opposite effect to that expected;
imitation was initially present for the object but
completely absent after the belief manipulation. It is
possible that there was initial anthropomorphism of the
object due to the oblong finger-like shape of the object
which had been designed to closely match the hand.
Conversely, seeing a real biological hand stimulus led to a
subsequent reduction in imitation for the object as it
appeared less biological following observation of the
hand. In Experiment 2, participants were presented with
the object followed by the object with manipulated belief.
No automatic imitation was observed initially for the
object, however after the belief manipulation automatic
imitation was present. Taken together, these experiments
suggest that belief can both increase and reduce automatic
imitation. The initial automatic imitation for the object in
Experiment 1 is difficult to explain, but may be due to
individual differences in participants’ initial beliefs about
the origin of the object stimulus. Future research is

planned to investigate the effects of belief in autism, as
some research suggests there may be a fault in top-down
modulation of automatic imitation in autism.
J-49 *SANS Poster Award Winner
THE STRUCTURE AND USAGE PATTERNS OF
ONLINE
SOCIAL
NETWORKS
MODERATE
ADOLESCENT NEURAL RESPONSES TO SOCIAL
INFLUENCE Matthew Brook O'Donnell, Joe Bayer, Chris
Cascio, Emily B. Falk; University of Michigan - Social
network analysis (SNA) provides a rich set of measures
and techniques to quantify the size, structure and scope of
an individual’s social environment as well as
operationalizations of sociological concepts such as social
capital, influence, support, connectedness and brokerage.
Online social networks, such as Facebook (FB), play an
increasingly dominant role in the development of social
identity during adolescence. One question is the extent to
which responses (and specifically neural responses) to
peer feedback in social influence situations are related to
the size, structure and usage patterns of an individual’s
online social network. Such networks provide access to
egocentric data that can be analyzed using the tools of
SNA. In this study, a group of male teens (n=35, ages 1617) rated mobile game applications twice: once prior to
fMRI scanning, and then a second time during fMRI
scanning, after receiving feedback about how a group of
their peers rated the same apps. The peer group ratings
were manipulated to include an equal number of ratings
that were HIGHER, LOWER, the SAME or NOT RATED
in comparison to the subject’s initial ratings made before
the imaging session. Participants also, subsequently,
played a game (Cyberball) in which we identified neural
regions associated with the experience of social exclusion
(compared to inclusion). Finally, in a second, separate, lab
session participants completed a survey regarding their
use of social media and added a FB app to their account
that requested permissions to gather information about
their FB network and usage. We hypothesized that neural
and behavioral responses to feedback that peers’ opinions
diverged from participant ratings would be moderated by
their social network characteristics. We were particularly
interested in regions associated with mentalizing and
social threat (identified functionally during Cyberball).
Thus, we first computed SNA measures on the Facebook
network data, including ego-degree (number of FB
friends), density (FOF interlinkage), betweeness centrality
(role of ego in linking friends). The size of participants’
Facebook networks was positively correlated with their
susceptibility to social influence within the app-rating
task. We next examined the SNA measures in relation to
neural responses to social feedback in the game-app
rating task within a priori defined regions of interested
(ROIs) identified in the exclusion > inclusion contrast
from Cyberball.
These regions included regions
previously associated with social pain (anterior insula,
subgenual cingulate) and mentalizing (dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex, temporal pole). Number of FB friends
and the density of FB network—derived from static (all
friends in network) and active (friends with whom
interaction is recorded in wall posts during previous six
months) networks—moderates the relationship between

participants’ decisions to change their behavior in
response to peer feedback, and activity within social pain
(AI) and mentalizing (DMPFC) regions identified using
the exclusion localizer. These data suggest that social
connection in the new media environment may affect
and/or be affected by the ways that teens respond to
social feedback. In addition, these data contribute to our
understanding of the role of the brain’s socio-emotional
systems during every day social interactions in
adolescents.
J-50
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
EMOTION
REAPPRAISAL
IN
INDIVIDUALS
WITH
EXTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
AND
NEGATIVE AFFECT Allison J. Lake, Thomas W. James,
Peter R. Finn; Indiana University - Externalizing
psychopathology (EXT) comprises a range of
disinhibitory disorders, including substance use disorders
and behavioral problems such as conduct disorder and
antisocial personality disorder. In addition to various
cognitive deficits related to reduced activation in areas
associated with cognitive control, high EXT individuals
also display high levels of emotion dysregulation and
negative affect (NA; e.g. depression, anxiety). Previous
research with healthy controls suggests that reappraisal is
an effective emotion regulatory strategy that draws
heavily on areas of the prefrontal cortex to down-regulate
emotion-related areas including the amgydala during
affective events. Limited reports using reappraisal
paradigms in high NA-only groups implicate amygdala
hyper-reactivity as a source of general emotion
dysregulation in these groups. General models of EXT,
however, suggest dysregulation of cognitive control
regions during reappraisal, which may also lead to
emotion dysregulation among these individuals. In order
to specify the breakdowns associated with reappraisal
and thereby gain insight into the unique emotion
regulatory deficits associated with EXT and NA, we
utilized a group design that fully crossed EXT and NA
(low vs. high) in a traditional negative emotion
reappraisal task. As predicted, group differences were
largely independent. However, these differences were
found outside the hypothesized areas, specifically visual
perception and supplementary motor areas for EXT and
NA, respectively. These results suggest unique
mechanisms of emotion dysregulation between
individuals with high levels of EXT and NA.
J-51
NATIVE
LANGUAGE
TRIGGERS
GREATER
POSTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX ACTIVITY IN
IMPLICIT SELF-REFERENTIAL EVALUATION PinHao A. Chen, Dartmouth College; Dylan D. Wagner,
Dartmouth College; Joseph M. Moran, Harvard University;
William W. Kelley, Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton,
Dartmouth College - A robust finding in social
neuroscience is the activation of cortical midline
structures such as medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and
posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) in explicit self-referential
processing tasks (Kelley et al., 2002; Heatherton et al.,

2006; Mitchell et al., 2006). These regions are also
activated when participants process self-relevant
information implicitly (Moran et al., 2009). In a recent
study of bilingual Chinese subjects, we found enhanced
PCC activation for explicit self-judgments when the trait
words were presented in Chinese, but not in English
(Chen et al., 2012). The current study builds on this work
by examining PCC activation when Chinese participants
implicitly process self-relevant facts presented in the
participants’ first (Chinese), and second languages
(English). Sixteen native Chinese-speaking students, who
were also fluent in English, were recruited. Prior to
scanning,
participants
provided
autobiographical
information on 27 categories, (e.g., their hometown,
mother’s name, etc.) in both Chinese and English. In an
event-related fMRI paradigm, participants viewed 200
Chinese words and their corresponding English words.
These words reflected SELF (self-relevant facts in white
font, n=40), NEUTRAL (self-irrelevant words in white
font, n=120), or were ODDBALL (self-irrelevant facts in
green font, n=40). Participants were instructed to press a
button only when words appeared in green font
(ODDBALL). Whole brain analysis revealed greater
activation in MPFC, PCC, bilateral temporo-parietal
junction, and right para-hippocampus for SELF relative to
NEUTRAL words. A PCC region of interest (ROI: -3, -33,
27) was defined by the peak activation coordinate in the
SELF vs. NEUTRAL contrast. Activation in this PCC ROI
was significantly greater in the orthogonal contrast of
viewing self-relevant Chinese words versus English
words (t(15) = 2.46, P < 0.05). This was consistent with our
previous findings that PCC engagement was greater
when participants performed explicit self-judgments in
their first language (Chinese) than in their second
language (English). Given previous research suggesting
the involvement of PCC in autobiographical memory, it is
possible that such memories are encoded in and more
easily retrieved by the participants’ first language than
the second language. Future studies are needed to test
this possibility.
J-52 *SANS Poster Award Winner
THE
AMYGDALOSTRIATAL
AND
CORTICOSTRIATAL EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY IN
ANTICIPATION AND EVALUATION OF FACIAL
ATTRACTIVENESS Hongbo Yu, Xiaolin Zhou, Peking
University - Decision-making consists of an anticipation
stage and an outcome evaluation stage (Platt, 2002). The
ventral striatum (VS) is pivotal to both stages (Haber and
Knutson, 2010), bridging motivation and action. The
ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and the
amygdala play important roles decision-making and goaldirected behaviors and are found to work in concert with
the VS (Li et al., 2011; Mobbs et al., 2009). However, it is
less clear concerning how the vmPFC and the amygdala
work together with the VS in functioning human brain.
Here we combined fMRI with dynamic causal modeling
(DCM) to investigate the information flow along
amygdalostriatal and corticostriatal pathways in a beauty
guessing task. Specifically, we asked the participant to
guess whether a blurred photo of female face was
attractive (anticipation stage) and then presented them

with an unblurred photo of either an attractive or an
unattractive face (evaluation stage). We found that at the
anticipation stage, the bilateral amygdala and VS showed
higher activation for the “attractive” guess than for the
“unattractive” guess. At the evaluation stage, the vmPFC
and the bilateral VS were more activated by the feedback
faces whose attractiveness level was congruent with the
participants’ initial guess than by the incongruent ones.
The evaluation-related activities in the vmPFC and the VS
were further modulated by the attractiveness of the
feedback face: the effect of congruency was only
significant for attractive feedback faces but not for
unattractive ones. DCM analyses showed that at the
anticipation stage, the choice-related information entered
the amygdalostriatal pathway through the amygdala and
was projected to the VS. Only the unidirectional intrinsic
connectivity from amygdala to the VS was significant,
which was enhanced by the action of guessing (attractive
and unattractive). At the evaluation stage, the outcomerelated information entered the corticostriatal pathway
through the vmPFC. Bidirectional connectivities existed
between the vmPFC and the VS, with the VS-to-vmPFC
connectivity weakened by unattractive faces. These
findings advanced our understanding of the reward
circuitry by demonstrating the pattern of information
flow along the amygdalostriatal and corticostriatal
pathways at discrete stages of decision-making.
J-53
*SANS Poster Award Winner
HIGH-RESOLUTION
FUNCTIONAL
NEUROIMAGING AT 7 TESLA SHOWS DEFINITIVE
ACTIVATION IN PERIAQUEDUCTAL GREY (PAG)
COLUMNS TO AFFECTIVE IMAGES Ajay B. Satpute,
Northeastern University; Tor Wager, University of Colorado,
Boulder; Julien Cohen-Adad, Polytechnique Montreal; Marta
Bianciardi, Massachusetts General Hospital; Ji-Kyung Choi,
Massachusetts General Hospital; Jason Buhle, University of
Colorado, Boulder; Larry Wald, Massachusetts General
Hospital; Lisa Feldman Barrett, Northeastern University,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School The periaqueductal grey (PAG) is a nucleus in the brain
stem that is related to a variety of functions including
sexual reproduction, social and emotional stress, pain,
and arousal. In non-human animals, these functions are
organized into columns with different columns and
portions of columns being associated with specific
physiological and motor response patterns. Little is
known about how the PAG operates in humans however.
Non-invasive studies of PAG function in humans must
rely on functional neuroimaging, but it has been difficult
to pinpoint activity in this area because the PAG
surrounds an aqueduct that produces large fluctuations in
bold signal and because examining the columnar
arrangement requires sub millimeter resolution. Using
high resolution functional neuroimaging at 7 Tesla and a
customized analysis procedure, we provide the first
definitive neuroimaging evidence for functional
activation in the PAG to affective inducting images. We
show distinct activations in the vicinity of the lateral and
ventrolateral columns. This technological advance opens
new directions for examining the role of the PAG in affect
and emotion in humans as well as across a variety of

other domains.
J-54
SYSTEM JUSTIFICATION AND RESPONSES TO
FEEDBACK: AN EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS
STUDY Shona M. Tritt, Jordan B. Peterson, Michael Inzlicht;
University of Toronto - System Justification (SJ), the
endorsement/ rationalization of the current, social,
economic, or political system (e.g., Jost et al., 2008), has
been argued to serve anxiety buffering psychological
functions. SJ has been found to protect against some of the
negative psychological consequences that seem to
accompany societal inequality (Napier & Jost, 2008).
Presumably, this is because it allows individuals,
whatever their class or societal status, to feel that they live
in a meaningful, just, and predictable world.
We
assessed the possibility that SJ is associated with more
general biases in information processing. If systemjustifying beliefs are adopted as a means of selfregulation, then they might be associated with biased
processing of information that promotes positive affect
and reduces negative affect.
We use event-related
potentials (ERPs) to explore the association between
system justifying beliefs and attentional bias to expected
and unexpected positive and negative feedback. If SJ is
associated with the tendency to focus more on positive
and less on negative information then this type of belief
should be correlated with enhanced ERPs in response to
positive compared to negative self-referential information
(feedback). Furthermore, if system justifiers have a
tendency to ignore information that is inconsistent with
their expectations (uncertainty threat), then they should
exhibit reduced ERPs in response to unexpected
compared to expected feedback.
Method Participants
(N=28) completed an 8-item questionnaire assessment of
SJ and a time estimation task on a computer in which they
received expected and unexpected positive and negative
feedback while electroencephelography was recorded. We
specifically looked at the feedback related negativity
(FRN), quantified as the difference in voltage between the
most negative peak 200-300 ms after response onset and
the preceding positive peak 100-200 ms after response
onset, at the Fz electrode cite. To isolate the effects of
valance and expectation, we created difference scores
representing the FRN in response to 1) expected negative
minus expected positive feedback, 2) unexpected negative
minus unexpected positive feedback, 3) unexpected
negative feedback minus expected negative feedback, and
4) unexpected positive minus expected positive feedback.
Results SJ was related to significantly reduced FRN in
response to unexpected versus expected negative
feedback (r=.40, p=.037) and a trend was noted whereby
SJ was related to greater FRN in response to expected
positive compared to expected negative feedback (r=.32,
p=.099). Discussion The results of our study suggest that
system justifiers respond more to positive than to
negative feedback and respond less to unexpected
compared to expected negative feedback. Taken together,
it seems that system justifiers responded less to anxietyprovoking information and more to positive information.
These findings are consistent with Napier & Jost’s (2010)

notion that system justification serves a palliative
function. However, our results may additionally suggest
that SJ is associated with self-regulatory tendencies that
are more general that previously considered, extending to
the realm of attentional biases to self-referential
information. This research may provide understanding of
the broader self-regulatory motivational systems
associated with system justifying beliefs and may help to
inform which individuals and situations are most
conducive to SJ.
J-55
NEURAL
MEDIATORS
OF
COMPETITIVE
BEHAVIOR, DEPENDENT ON HIERARCHICAL
RANKING AND COMPETITION OUTCOME Erik L
Knight, Pranjal Mehta, Junaid S Merchant; University of
Oregon - Social hierarchies are ubiquitous in humans'
lives, influencing physiology, immune functioning, and
behavior dependent on one’s position within a hierarchy.
Recent work has begun to determine the underlying
neural networks associated with representations of these
social phenomena. But what role these and other neural
networks play in mediating competitive behavior - an
important aspect of gaining or losing status within a
hierarchy - against higher and lower ranked opponents is
unknown. This study sublingually administered
suprapharmacological doses of testosterone to women
prior to exposing them to a fixed contest against higher
and lower ranked opponents. Participants then chose
whether they would like to compete again with the same
opponent or a different one. Behavioral analyses
demonstrate that status (high vs. low) and competition
outcome (win vs. lose) interact to significantly affect
decisions to compete again. This study will examine
neural mediators of competitive behavior that respond to
the interaction of hierarchical context and competition
outcome. The role of testosterone - a steroid hormone
known to influence and respond to hierarchical
interactions like competitions - in modulating these
neural networks will also be explored. The results will
help point to potential means for hierarchies - as narrow
as workplace rankings and as broad as socioeconomic
status - to influence social behavior, health, and wellbeing.
J-56
MOTIVATION MODULATES TASK PERFORMANCE
AND
STRIATAL
ACTIVATION
DURING
A
FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING TASK Samantha
Swanson, Elizabeth Tricomi; Rutgers University - The
striatum is reliably activated by outcomes that influence
learning, such as rewards and punishments, including
performance-related feedback. Because striatal responses
to rewards and punishments are modulated by the
subjective value of such stimuli, we hypothesized that
striatal responses to performance-related feedback would
be affected by the individual’s motivation to perform well
on the task. To investigate this hypothesis, we
administered two sessions of a feedback-based paired
associate learning task, before and after an intervention
that was designed to increase motivation to perform well

on the task. The trials in the two sessions were unrelated,
with 80 distinct trials in each. During the break between
sessions, participants first rated on a scale of 0 to 10 how
important their performance on the task was to them.
Following their rating, they were encouraged to provide
two reasons that their rating was as high as it was, rather
than a lower number. The intervention was inspired by
techniques used in motivational interviewing, and
behavioral piloting revealed the intervention to be
effective at increasing both motivation and performance
on our learning task. Moreover, the extent to which
motivation increased was correlated with the degree of
improvement in task performance. We found using fMRI
that the caudate nucleus is more strongly engaged in
processing positive feedback after the intervention than it
is before the intervention. The caudate nucleus has been
previously implicated in feedback processing during this
same paired-associate learning task. Therefore, our results
suggest that a motivational intervention that encourages
participants to reflect on reasons to want to perform well
can sensitize the striatum to positive feedback and
facilitate enhanced performance during learning.
J-57
AGE-DIFFERENCES IN BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR
DURING RECOGNITION OF HAPPY AND ANGRY
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AT LONGER AND SHORTER
DURATIONS Lennart Högman, Stockholm University;
Joakim Svärd, Karolinska Institute; William Högman,
Stockholm University; Natalie Ebner, University of Florida;
Irena Makower, Stockholm University; Håkan Fischer,
Stockholm University - Current research denotes that some
aspects of emotion recognition decline with age. This
seems to be true especially for the recognition of facial
expressions of anger, sadness and fear and to a lesser
extent for positive and disgust expressions. It is however
not clear whether this age-effect exists also in rapid
detection of facial expressions, i.e., microexpressions. In
the present study we assessed age differences in the
recognition of facial expressions and microexpressions. In
a first experiment, n = 27 young (Mage = 25.3) and n = 30
older (Mage = 68.4) participants identified happy, angry,
and neutral facial expressions presented for 3500 ms
during an fMRI session using a 3T Siemens Magnetom
Trio Tim scanner. In a second behavioral experiment
some month later the same young and older participants
were presented with seven different basic facial
microexpressions (angry, disgusted, fearful, happy,
neutral, sad, surprised) displayed for only 200 ms and
had to indicate which facial expression was shown.
Behavioral results from the first experiment showed no
significant differences between the age groups in their
ability to recognize facial expressions: Both younger and
older participants were better at recognizing happy faces
than angry faces. Here older compared to younger
participants showed greater medial prefrontal (MFG)
activation for happy faces compared to the younger
subjects. These age-differences were not present for angry
faces. Results from the second experiment showed that
older participants had more difficulties recognizing
microexpressions of fear and sadness than younger
participants. Interestingly, the difference in MFG

activation between happy and angry faces in Experiment
1 was positively related to the contrast in hit rate for
happy relative to angry microexpressions in Experiment 2
in older but not younger adults. These results are in line
with a “positivity bias” in older adults discussed in the
literature.
J-58 *SANS Poster Award Winner
THE EFFECT OF MUSICAL EXPERIENCES AND
MUSICAL TRAINING ON NEURAL RESPONSES TO
EMOTIONALLY EVOCATIVE MUSIC AND NONMUSICAL SOUNDS Rebecca J. Lepping, University of
Kansas, University of Kansas Medical Center; Ruth Ann
Atchley, University of Kansas; Laura E. Martin, University of
Kansas Medical Center; Trisha M. Patrician, University of
Kansas, University of Kansas Medical Center; Rick Ingram,
University of Kansas; Alicia Ann Clair, University of Kansas;
William M. Brooks, University of Kansas Medical Center; Cary
R. Savage, University of Kansas Medical Center Background: Musical training has previously been
associated with differences in neural processing of
musical syntax, congruency, and other aspects of music
cognition.
Other research suggests that emotional
responses to music are learned, not through musical
training, but through the process of enculturation. The
current ongoing study used functional MRI to investigate
neural processing of emotional everyday sounds and
emotional music. Specifically, we assessed the impact of
musical
training
and
self-reported
affective
responsiveness to music on fMRI activation in this
auditory
emotion-processing
paradigm.
Methods:
Fourteen participants underwent fMRI scanning (5 males;
MeanAGE=24.8; MeanED=16.1 years). fMRI data were
collected while participants listened to short segments of
emotionally evocative, unmanipulated instrumental
music; nonmusical sounds selected from the International
Affective Digital Sound set (IADS); and emotionally
neutral tones. An earlier rating study verified the music
and sounds were equally arousing and equally valenced.
Stimuli were presented in thirty second blocks,
alternating between positive, negative, and neutral
stimuli. Participants rated each block as positive or
negative via button press. Duration of musical training in
years was collected in a short demographic questionnaire.
Self-reported affective responsiveness to music was
assessed with the Brief Music Experience Questionnaire
(MEQ). The Brief MEQ is a 53 item self-report measure of
music centrality in the respondent’s life, his or her
musical aptitude, and his or her experience with and
reaction to music; affective responsiveness is a subscale of
this measure (MEQ-AR). GLM analysis was conducted
for the fMRI data, and a whole-brain map of the contrast
(Music > Sounds) was generated. Musical training and
MEQ-AR scores were then correlated with each voxel in
the fMRI contrast map. Results: The emotionally matched
Music and Sounds activated different brain networks,
with music activating areas involved in emotional
decision-making and conflict resolution (anterior
cingulate cortex [ACC], precuneus, bilateral occipital
cortex) more than sounds, and sounds activating areas
involved in problem solving and semantic processing
more than music, including dorsolateral prefrontal cortex

(DLPFC) and primary auditory cortex. Musical training
was not significantly correlated with brain response in
any region across the whole brain. MEQ-AR scores,
however, were significantly positively correlated with
fMRI activity in several regions, corrected for multiple
comparisons, including bilateral DLPFC, posterior insula,
parietal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, lingual gyrus,
occipital cortex, and cerebellum. Bilateral DLPFC showed
significant activation in the basic contrast: sounds evoked
a greater response than music overall; however, greater
responsiveness to music in this region was associated
with greater MEQ-AR scores.
Discussion: In this
paradigm, musical and non-musical sounds, carefully
matched for emotional quality and level of arousal,
evoked different patterns of brain activity. Additionally,
this activity was modulated by individual variation in
affective responsiveness to music, but not by years of
musical training. The present study, therefore, supports
the hypothesis that emotional responses to music are
likely learned through experiences with music in social
settings, and are not dependent on formal training in
music.
J-59
SOCIAL DOMINANCE CUES INTERFERE WITH
NEURO-COGNITIVE
COMPONENT
AND
BEHAVIORAL PERFORMANCE DURING ACTION
MONITORING Narun Pornpattananangkul, Northwestern
University, *ICNC Travel Award Winner; Vivian X. Wang,
Northwestern University; Natalie Blahunka, Boston College;
Joan Y. Chiao, Northwestern University - Social dominance
cues have a powerful effect across many animal species
and human societies (Chiao, 2010). The present study was
designed to examine the extent to which social dominance
cues influences performance and event-related brain
potential (ERP) during an action-monitoring task. A novel
social dominance Go/NoGo (GNG) paradigm was used
while ERP was measured. In this paradigm, facial cues
varying in social dominance (i.e., raised, bowed and
neutral faces for dominant, submissive and neutral cues,
respectively) were employed as Go/NoGo stimuli. In
each of nine blocks, participants were instructed to ignore
one type of social dominance cues (i.e., NoGo stimuli) and
respond to the other two types (i.e., Go stimuli). The
sensitivity index, or d\', was used to analyze accuracy in
behavioral performance such that higher value indicated
higher hit rate and/or lower false alarm. Results showed
that d\' was significantly lower in dominant-NoGo blocks
(M = 2.92, SD = .67) than in submissive-NoGo blocks (M =
3.23, SD = .56; F(2,34) = 3.640, p =.037, partial Œ∑2 = .18).
This worse performance in dominant-NoGo blocks
occurred despite the fact that participants responded
significantly quicker in submissive-NoGo blocks (M =
449.83 ms, SD = 57.38) than in dominance-NoGo (M =
467.04 ms, SD = 57.03) and neutral-NoGo (M = 478.03 ms,
SD = 54.37) blocks (F(2,34) = 9.37, p =.001, partial Œ∑2 =
.36). As for ERP, the N2 component at FCz that has been
viewed as reflecting response-conflict monitoring
processes (Nieuwenhuis, Yeung, van den Wildenberg, &
Ridderinkhof, 2003) was analyzed. We found that Nogo
N2 amplitudes for dominant faces (M = -2.46, SD = 3.42)
were significantly less negative than that for neutral (M =

-4.06, SD = 3.12) and submissive faces (M = -4.28, SD =
3.46; F(2,34) = 9.51, p =.001, partial Œ∑2 = .36). Similarly,
across blocks, Go N2 amplitudes for dominant faces (M =
-2.51, SD = 2.62) were significantly less negative than that
for neutral (M = -3.77, SD = 2.72) and submissive faces (M
= -3.78, SD = 2.80; F(2,34) = 7.06, p =.003, partial Œ∑2 =
.29). Finally, there was a significant interaction of N2
between Go/NoGo stimuli and social dominance cues
(F(1.62,27.58) = 7.61, p = .004, partial Œ∑2 = .31) such that
although NoGo N2 was more negative than Go N2 in
submissive-NoGo and neutral-NoGo blocks, NoGo N2
was less negative than Go N2 in dominant-NoGo blocks.
Altogether, results suggest that perceiving high social
dominance cues impairs response-conflict monitoring
processes at both neural-cognitive and behavioral levels.
Our findings have implications for understanding the role
of social dominance perception as a social-situational
factor when monitoring actions.
J-60
PARENTING AND NEURAL PLASTICITY IN
HUMAN FATHERS' BRAINS Pilyoung Kim, University of
Denver; Paola Rigo, University of Trento, University of
Denver; James F. Leckman, Yale University School of Medicine;
Linda C. Mayes, Yale University School of Medicine; Ruth
Feldman, Bar-Ilan University; James E. Swain, University of
Michigan - Previous studies demonstrated brain regions
that are important for parenting behaviors in human
mothers; however, little is known about the neural basis
of parenting in fathers. In mothers, increased activations
in the striatum, thalamocingulate circuits and prefrontal
cortex (PFC) in responses to infant pictures or cry sounds
are associated with sensitive parenting behaviors (Barrett
& Fleming, 2010; Swain, Lorberbaum, Kose, & Strathearn,
2007). We previously reported that increased gray matter
volumes in the striatum during the first few months
postpartum was associated with mothers’ more positive
thoughts and feelings about their own baby (Kim et al.,
2010). Rodent and primate studies suggest that similar
neural regions may also be important for sensitive
parenting and parent-child emotional bonding in fathers.
For example, parenting experience was associated with
the greater density of the PFC in male marmosets
(Kozorovitskiy, Hughes, Lee, & Gould, 2006). Thus, in the
current longitudinal study, we investigated structural
changes in brain areas responsible for parental behaviors
over time during the early postpartum period. Biological
fathers (n=17) with full-term, healthy infants have been
recruited in postpartum hospital rooms. All the fathers
were mostly college educated and middle-to-upper class.
High- resolution structural images were collected when
fathers visited to the research center at 2-4 weeks
postpartum (Time 1) and at 12-16 weeks postpartum
(Time 2). The longitudinal VBM analysis was performed
with VBM8 toolbox for Statistical Parametric Mapping 2
(SPM8) (Wellcome Department of Neurology, London,
UK). The processed structural images were analyzed with
a repeated-measure ANOVA to test changes between
Time 1 and Time 2 in gray matter volumes, controlling for
fathers’ age, parenting experience, and scan intervals
between two time points. An initial, voxel-wise threshold
of p< 0.005 and a minimum cluster size of 260 voxels gave

a corrected p value of 0.05, using Monte-Carlo
simulations. The longitudinal VBM analysis revealed that
fathers had significant increase in gray matter volume
from Time 1 to Time 2 in several brain regions, p< 0.05
(corrected). The brain regions included left striatum,
subgenual cingulate cortex, and right lateral PFC (BA
45,46,47) (Figure 1). Grey matter volumes in these regions
were also negatively correlated with depression and state
anxiety at Time 2, based on the BDI and STAI measures,
ps<.05. On the other hand, fathers showed significant
decrease in gray matter volume in right orbitofrontal
cortex and right fusiform gyrus from Time 1 to Time 2,
p<0.05 (corrected). The findings suggest that parenting
experience in early postpartum period may be associated
with structural increase in neural regions for parental
motivation and mood regulation in human fathers. The
structural increase in these regions may be related to
better mood regulation, which can also facilitate paternal
sensitivity toward a baby. The efficiency in processing
infant-related information may explain the structural
decrease in neural regions for emotional and social
information processing over the first three months
postpartum. The findings may shed light on what brain
regions may be linked to a human father’s ability to
develop appropriate parental behaviors and parent-infant
attachment.
J-61
YOU ARE WHAT YOU SENSE: BASELINE
FUNCTIONAL PROPERTIES IN SOMATOSENSORY
BRAIN
REGIONS
PREDICT
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES IN EXTRAVERSION Tong Sheng,
Katherine Fu, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh; University of Southern
California - The “sensory hypothesis of personality” posits
that extroverted individuals tend to be more stimulus
seeking as compared to introverts due to lower baseline
levels of arousal in sensory cortices. However, while
evidence from behavioral and functional neuroimaging
studies offer some support for this hypothesis, a direct
relationship linking baseline hemodynamic activity in
sensory cortices to extraversion has not been clearly
established. In the current study, we used fMRI to scan
participants during resting state and found that restingstate hemodynamic signals in primary and secondary
somatosensory cortices showed an inverse linear
relationship to trait scores in extraversion. A similar
relationship was also observed in the thalamus. Together,
these results suggest a relationship between the baseline
properties in cortical and subcortical sensory networks
and personality traits. These findings support the sensory
hypothesis of personality and, more generally, highlight
the important relationship between functional properties
of fundamental neural networks and disposition.
J-62
THE VALUE OF PSYCHOPATHY: ABERRANT
COMPUTATION OF SUBJECTIVE VALUE DURING
INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE IN INCARCERATED
PSYCHOPATHS Joshua W. Buckholtz, Harvard University,
Massachusetts General Hospital; Erik Kastman, Harvard
University; Hayley Dorfman, Harvard University; Joseph P.

Newman, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Kent. K Kiehl,
MIND Research Network, University of New Mexico Psychopaths are notorious for their callousness and lack
of remorse – their “cold-bloodedness” – highlighting the
dramatic emotional and interpersonal deficits that
characterize these individuals. Prior work suggests that
abnormal connectivity and function within a corticolimbic
circuit comprised chiefly of amygdala and medial
prefronal cortex, and implicated in emotional arousal,
emotion regulation, and mentalizing, may underpin such
socio-affective deficiencies. However, as much as
psychopaths are known for a lack of reactivity in certain
affective and social contexts, their inability to delay
gratification – reflected in high levels of impulsive
antisocial behavior, sensation seeking, and substance
abuse – suggest an exaggerated response to rewards.
Previously, Buckholtz and colleagues (2010) have found
evidence of heightened activity and dopamine
transmission in the ventral striatum following monetary
and drug rewards (respectively) in community volunteers
with impulsive-antisocial traits. This is consistent with
morphometric data showing structural abnormalities
within the striatum in incarcerated psychopaths (Glenn et
al 2010, Schiffer et al 2011). While together these data raise
the possibly that striatal hyper-responsiveness may
impair the ability to delay gratification and drive
impulsive-antisocial behavior in psychopathy, several
questions remain. First, while functional abnormalities
within the striatum have been shown in community
volunteers with impulsive-antisocial traits, clear evidence
for striatal hyper-reactivity in “true” psychopaths (i.e.
those meeting clinical diagnostic criteria) is lacking.
Moreover, the cognitive mechanisms through by which
striatal hypersensitivity might contribute to poor
decision-making in psychopathic individuals remains
unclear. Given the known role of this region in calculating
subjective value, we hypothesized that exaggerated
striatal reactivity could lead to an aberrant assignment of
value to more immediate options during decisionmaking, inducing a maladaptive bias in choice behavior.
To test this hypothesis, we scanned clinically assessed
incarcerated offenders with fMRI during an intertemporal
choice task. We recruited 49 male inmates (age 20-45;
mean = 31) at two medium security state prisons in
Wisconsin. A mobile MRI facility enabled local scanning
at each correctional facility. Participants were clinically
evaluated for DSM-IV disorders and psychopathy using
the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM (SCID) and
the Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R), respectively.
During fMRI at 1.5T, participants performed an
intertemporal choice task in which they were asked, on
each of 126 trials, to choose between two monetary
rewards. One reward was smaller in magnitude but
available sooner (between 0 and 45 days), while the other
was larger in magnitude (by between 1 and 50%) but only
available after a delay (between 15 to 30 days after the
“sooner” reward on that trial). Participants were
instructed that two trials would be selected at random for
veridical payout at the end of the experiment. Each
individual’s hyperbolic discounting factor k was
calculated; this was then used to compute trial-wise
estimates of subjective value for each option. A subjective
value difference measure (SVDiff = SVsooner – SVlater)

was calculated for each trial and used as a parametric
modulator of trial onset regressors in a random-effects
general linear model analysis within SPM8. For each
subject, we calculated correlations between their PCL-R
score and SVDiff fMRI beta-weights (extracted from
anatomically defined regions of interest). Age and
substance abuse history were included as covariates.
Across participants, neural signals encoding subjective
value were observed in ventral striatum and medial
prefrontal cortex (pFDR < 0.05). Consistent with our
hypothesis, PCL-R total scores were positively correlated
with subjective value signals originating within the
striatum (r = 0.44, p < 0.005). This relationship was not
factor-specific, as significant correlations were observed
for both factor 1 (emotional-interpersonal) and factor 2
(impulsive-antisocial) scores. Importantly, despite the fact
that substance abuse history is independently associated
with striatal SV signals, the relationship between
psychopathy and striatal SV-related activity is still
significant when controlling for individual substance
abuse history (p < 0.01).
J-63
SYSTEM JUSTIFICATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH
BRAIN STRUCTURE H. Hannah Nam, New York
University; John T. Jost, New York University; Jay J. Van
Bavel, New York University; Daniel Campbell-Meiklejohn,
New York University, Aarhus University - System
justification theory holds that people are motivated to
defend and bolster the way things are, rationalizing the
social, economic, and political status quo (Jost, Banaji, &
Nosek, 2004). People who endorse ideologies that serve to
justify the status quo in society tend to exhibit higher
needs to reduce threat and uncertainty (Jost & Hunyady,
2005). We tested the hypothesis that greater system
justifying tendencies associate with differences in
neuroanatomical structure. In a sample of 48 American
participants, we related self-reported system justification
motivation to grey matter volume using structural MRI,
adjusting for variability in brain volume due to age,
gender, and overall size differences. We found that higher
system justification was associated with increased grey
matter volume of the bilateral amygdala and orbitofrontal
cortex region. Our results extend previous findings that
system-justifying ideologies (i.e., political conservatism)
can be reflected in human brain structure (Kanai, Feilden,
Firth, & Rees, 2011), and suggest that greater sensitivity to
cues for threat and uncertainty associated with system
justification is reflected in brain structure.

	  

