Social & Affective Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting 2009
October 9-11, Marriott Downtown
New York, NY

Organizing Committee
David Amodio, New York University
Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin
William Cunningham, The Ohio State University
Matthew Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles
Jason Mitchell, Harvard University
Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University

Schedule-at-a-glance
Friday, October 9
3:00-5:00 PM
5:00-6:30 PM
6:30-8:00 PM

Registration, 3rd floor foyer
Session A: Keynote Address
Welcome Reception

Saturday, October 10
8:00-9:00 AM
9:00-10:30 AM
10:30-11:00 AM
11:00-12:30 PM
12:30-2:30 PM
2:30-4:00 PM
4:00-5:30 PM
5:30-6:30 PM

Continental breakfast, 3rd floor foyer
Session B: Emotion & Motivation
Coffee break, 3rd floor foyer
Session C: Hormones, Brain & Behavior
Break for lunch
Session D: Attitudes & Social Cognition
Session E: Poster Presentations
Session F: Keynote Address

Sunday, October 11
8:00-9:00 AM
9:00-10:30 AM
10:30-12:00 PM
12:00-1:30 PM
1:30-3:15 PM

Continental breakfast, 3rd floor foyer
Session G: Development & Theory of Mind
Session H: Poster Presentations
Break for lunch
Session I: Culture & Intergroup Relations

2

Presentations
Session A: Keynote Address
Friday, October 9, 2009
5:00 PM – 6:30 PM
Joseph E. LeDoux, New York University

Session B: Emotion & Motivation
Saturday, October 10, 2009
9:00 AM – 10:30 AM
Eddie Harmon-Jones, Texas A&M University
Dean Mobbs, University College London
William Cunningham, The Ohio State University
Susan Fiske, Princeton University

ABSTRACTS
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE STUDY OF ASYMMETRIC PREFRONTAL CORTICAL
ACTIVATION AND MOTIVATION Eddie Harmon-Jones, Texas A&M University – Decades of research
using multiple methods have suggested that the left and right prefrontal cortices are asymmetrically
involved in emotive experience and expression. The left prefrontal cortex is posited to be involved in
approach motivational processes, and the right prefrontal cortex is posited to be involved in withdrawal
motivational processes. My colleagues and I have conducted a program of research aimed at better
understanding the role of the left prefrontal cortex in approach motivational processes. This talk will
review our recent research. Among the topics to be covered are: source localization of asymmetric EEG
alpha power during anger, the effect of ostracism and jealousy on relative left prefrontal activation, and
the effect of emotive body postures on asymmetric prefrontal cortical activation.

FROM THREAT TO FEAR: THE NEURAL ORGANIZATION OF DEFENSIVE FEAR SYSTEMS IN
HUMANS Dean Mobbs, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London, MRC-Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK; Jennifer L Marchant, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
University College London; Demis Hassabis, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London;
Ben Seymour, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London; Geoffrey Tan, Wellcome
Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London; Marcus Gray, Wellcome Trust Centre for
Neuroimaging, University College London; Predrag Petrovic, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
University College London, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden;
Raymond J. Dolan, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London; Christopher D. Frith,
Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London, Centre for Functional Integrative

3

Neuroscience, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark – Post-encounter and circa-strike defensive contexts
represent two adaptive responses to potential and imminent danger. In the context of a predator, the
post-encounter reflects the initial detection of the potential threat, whilst the circa-strike is associated with
direct predatory attack. We used fMRI to investigate the neural organization of anticipation and
avoidance of artificial predators with high or low probability of capturing the subject across analogous
post-encounter and circa-strike contexts of threat. Consistent with defense systems models, postencounter threat elicited activity in forebrain areas including subgenual anterior cingulate cortex
(sgACC), hippocampus and amygdala. Conversely, active avoidance during circa-strike threat increased
activity in mid-dorsal ACC and midbrain areas. During the circa-strike condition, subjects showed
increased coupling between the midbrain and mid-dorsal ACC and decreased coupling with the sgACC,
amygdala and hippocampus. Greater activity was observed in the right pregenual ACC for high
compared to low probability of capture during circa-strike threat. This region showed decreased
coupling with the amygdala, insula and ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Finally, we found that locomotor
errors correlated with subjective reports of panic for the high compared to low probability of capture
during the circa-strike threat and these panic-related locomotor errors were correlated with midbrain
activity. These findings support models suggesting that higher forebrain areas are involved in early
threat responses, including the assignment and control of fear, whereas as imminent danger results in fast
“hard-wired” defensive reactions mediated by the midbrain.

MOTIVATION AND THE AMYGDALA: GOALS SHAPE ACTIVATION William Cunningham, The
Ohio State University – Although early research implicated the amygdala in the automatic processing of
negative information, more recent research suggests that it plays a more general role in the processing of
the motivational relevance of various stimuli. In several studies, we demonstrate that relationships
between valence and amygdala activity contextually vary due to chronic and contextual goals.
Implications for the social neuroscience of prejudice will be explored.

EXPLORING WARMTH AND COMPETENCE: TOWARD NEURAL SIGNATURES FOR
FUNDAMENTAL CATEGORIES OF SOCIAL COGNITION Susan Fiske, Princeton University – Social
cognition reflects social evolutionary pressures. Social beings need to know, immediately, whether the
“other” is friend or foe (that is, intends good or ill) and, next, whether the “other” can enact those
intentions (that is, capability). Various labs have confirmed these two universal dimensions of social
cognition: warmth and competence. Promoting survival, people accordingly classify others to guide their
likely interactions. Others who appear low on both dimensions (e.g., the homeless) present no value, so
require no individualizing of their dispositions (Harris & Fiske, 2006) — avoidance-related
dehumanization. New data (Cikara, Eberhardt, & Fiske, under review) investigate approach-related
dehumanization, when the other possesses instrumental value (controls desired resources). Sexual
instrumentality and sexist attitudes influenced appraisals, memory, and neural responses to images of
sexualized and clothed men and women. Heterosexual men best recognized images of sexualized female
bodies (but not faces), as compared with other targets’ bodies; they also more quickly associated
sexualized women with first-person action verbs (“handle”) and clothed women with third-person action
verbs (“handles”) than the reverse. As predicted, neuroimaging data demonstrated that passively
viewing sexualized female targets activated regions associated with goal-directed behavior: premotor
cortex, globus pallidus, thalamus. Memory for sexualized women’s bodies correlated with
thalamus/pulvinar activation. Hostile sexism correlated negatively with activation of regions associated
with mental state attribution—mPFC, posterior cingulate, temporal poles—but only when viewing
sexualized women. Sexual instrumentality apparently modulates goal-relevant social cognition processes.

4

Session C: Hormones, Brain, & Behavior
Saturday, October 10, 2009
11:00 AM – 12:30 PM
Pranjal Mehta, Columbia University
Molly Crockett, University of Cambridge
Simone Shamay-Tsoory, University of Haifa
Karin Roelofs, Leiden University

ABSTRACTS
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF THE TESTOSTERONE-AGGRESSION RELATION: THE ROLE OF
ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX Pranjal Mehta, Columbia University; Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at
Austin - Testosterone plays a role in aggressive behavior, but the mechanisms remain unclear. The
present study tested the hypothesis that testosterone influences aggression through the orbitofrontal
cortex, a region implicated in self-regulation and impulse control. Thirty-two participants (17 men, 15
women) provided saliva samples for hormone measurement and then were scanned with fMRI while
playing the Ultimatum Game, a decision-making paradigm in which people choose between aggression
and monetary reward. Testosterone was associated with increased aggression following social
provocation (rejecting unfair offers). The effect of testosterone on aggression was explained by reduced
activity in the medial orbitofrontal cortex. The findings suggest that testosterone increases the propensity
toward aggression because of reduced activation of the neural circuitry of impulse control and selfregulation.

NEUROCHEMICAL MODULATION OF SOCIAL PREFERENCES Molly Crockett, Department of
Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge; Luke Clark, Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Cambridge; Trevor Robbins, Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge Decades of research have connected the neurotransmitter serotonin to prosocial behavior, but the
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. To investigate the psychological and neural processes
underlying the link between serotonin and prosocial behavior, we have used a well-studied behavioural
economics paradigm, the Ultimatum Game (UG). In this game, one player must decide whether to
accept or reject fair or unfair monetary offers from another player. Despite the fact that rejecting an offer
means forfeiting payment, humans tend to reject the majority of offers perceived to be unfair. We
recently used acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) to temporarily deplete serotonin levels in healthy
human volunteers before they played the UG. Compared with a placebo treatment, following ATD
participants rejected a higher proportion of unfair offers, while their basic monetary valuation process
remained unchanged. These results suggest that serotonin modulates social decision-making in a
complex fashion, rather than altering the processing of basic rewards. In the current study, we sought to
extend the neurochemical specificity of our finding. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
design, 30 healthy volunteers received citalopram (an SSRI that boosts serotonin neurotransmission),
atomoxetine (an SNRI that boosts noradrenaline transmission), and placebo. Ninety minutes following
drug administration, participants played several one-shot UGs. Compared to placebo, atomoxetine did
not influence rejection rates, but citalopram reduced rejection rates of economically attractive but
moderately unfair offers. These results suggest that the neurochemical modulation of social preferences
in the UG is bi-directional and specific to serotonin.

WHEN LESS IS MORE: THE NEURAL BASES OF ENVY AND SCHADENFREUDE Shamay-Tsoory
SG, University of Haifa; Dvash J, University of Haifa; Fischer M, University of Haifa; & Hendler T, Tel Aviv

5

University - Humans have an exceptional social tendency to compare themselves to others, “we feel
envious when we receive less valuable rewards and may rejoice when our pay-offs are more
advantageous. Envy and schadenfreude (gloating over the other's misfortune) are social emotions,
widely agreed to be a symptom of the human social tendency to compare one's pay-offs with those of
others. To examine the neural bases of envy and schadenfreude participants were scanned while playing
a cyber-game of chance involving monetary gains with another player. Our results show that in both
envy and schadenfreude conditions the 'mentalzing system' (particularly the medial prefrontal cortex)
was involved. Furthermore, the ventral striatum showed increased activation in shcadenfreude as
compared to the envy conditions and vice versa. In a second experiment we show that intranasal
administration of Oxytocin increases ratings of envy and schadenfreude , indicating that the
oxytocinergic system is involved in envy and schadenfreude . Collectively it is suggested that both the
mentalizing and the reward systems are involved in social comparison and that the oxytocinergic system
may have a modulatory effect on these emotions.

NEURO-ENDOCRINE CONTROL MECHANISMS IN SOCIAL FEAR AND AVOIDANCE Karin
Roelofs, Leiden University Institute for Psychological Research, Clinical, Health and Neuropsychology Unit Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), Leiden University, The Netherlands - Animal as well as
human studies have indicated that hyperactivity of the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA)-axis
(with its end product cortisol) is associated with social submissiveness and avoidance. In contrast,
activity of the Hypothalamus-Pituitary-Gonadal (HPG)-axis and its end product testosterone is
associated with social dominance and aggression. We approach this field by studying neuroendocrine
aspects of social fear and avoidance in individuals who have an extreme motivation to avoid social
interactions: patients with social phobia. In my presentation I’ll discuss a series of behavioral, ERP and
fMRI studies, investigating the influence of cortisol and testosterone on the cognitive and neural control
mechanisms involved in social approach and avoidance behavior. Results indicate that cortisol facilitates
social avoidance behavior in socially anxious individuals. In addition, for theoretical as well as clinical
purposes, it is particularly interesting to investigate neuroendocrine mechanisms implicated when
automatic avoidance tendencies need to be overridden and contra-intuitive social approach actions are
to be generated. Results from a recent fMRI study indicate that basal testosterone levels play a
modulatory role in the neural control of these contra-intuitive social actions. Together these findings
offer strong support for the relevance of the HPA and HPG axes in the regulation of social motivational
behavior.

Session D: Attitudes & Social Cognition
Saturday, October 10, 2009
2:30 PM – 4:00 PM
Michael Norton, Harvard Business School
Ingrid Olson, Temple University
Nicholas Rule, Tufts University
Matthew Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles

ABSTRACTS

6

NEURAL MECHANISMS OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE Malia F. Mason, Columbia Business School; Rebecca
Dyer, Columbia Business School; Michael I. Norton, Harvard Business School - The present investigation
explores the neural mechanisms underlying the impact of social influence on preferences. We socially
tagged symbols as valued or not by exposing participants to the preferences of their peers and assessed
subsequent brain activity during an incidental processing task in which participants viewed popular,
unpopular, and novel symbols. The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) differentiated between symbols
that were and were not socially tagged, a possible index of normative influence, while aspects of the
striatum (the caudate) differentiated between popular and unpopular symbols, a possible index of
informational influence. These results suggest that integrating activity in these two brain regions may
differentiate objects that have become valued as a result of social influence from those valued for nonsocial reasons.

CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT SOCIAL MEANING IN THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL
LOBES Ingrid R. Olson, Temple University, University of Pennsylvania; Lars A. Ross, Temple University,
University of Pennsylvania - Two distinct literatures have emerged on the functionality of the anterior
temporal lobes: in one field, the ATL's are conceived of as a central "hub" for semantic or conceptual
knowledge. In another field, the ATL's are thought to play some undetermined role in social-emotional
functions such as theory of mind (ToM). Here we attempted to reconcile these distinct functions by
assessing whether the ATL plays a meaningful role in social semantic processing. Social semantic
functions refer to knowledge about social concepts and rules. In a first experiment we tested the idea that
social semantic representations can account for activations in the ATL to social attribution stimuli,
Heider and Simmel (H&S) animations. Left ATL activations to H&S stimuli overlapped with activations
to social words. In a second experiment we assessed the putative roles of the ATLs in the processing of
narratives and ToM content and found evidence for a role of the ATLs in the processing of ToM over and
above narrative. These findings indicate that the ATL is more sensitive so social semantic stimuli then to
non-social semantic stimuli and provide evidence in support of the model that the ATL is importantly
involved in representing conceptual knowledge about the social world.

AMYGDALA RESPONSE REFLECTS THE ACCURACY OF FIRST IMPRESSIONS Nicholas O. Rule,
Tufts University; Joseph M. Moran, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Jonathan B. Freeman, Tufts
University; John D. E. Gabrieli, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology; Nalini Ambady, Tufts University - The human amygdala responds to first
impressions of people as judged from their faces, such as normative judgments about the
trustworthiness of strangers. It is unknown, however, whether amygdala responses to first impressions
are accurate and can be validated by objective criteria. Here, we examined amygdala responses to faces
of Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) where real-world outcomes could be measured objectively by the
amounts of profits made by each CEO’s company. During fMRI scanning, participants made incidental
judgments about the symmetry of each CEO’s face. After scanning, participants rated each CEO’s face on
leadership ability. Parametric analysis showed that greater left amygdala response to the CEOs’ faces
was associated with greater profits made by the CEOs’ companies. Greater left amygdala response was
also associated with higher post-scan ratings of the CEOs’ leadership ability. Thus, amygdala response
reflected both subjective judgments and objective measures of leadership ability based on first
impressions.

PERSUASION, ATTITUDE CHANGE, AND MEMES: A SOCIAL COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
APPROACH Matthew Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles – The use of communication for the
purpose of persuasion has been around as long as communication itself. Yet only in the last half century
has there been any science of persuasion and to date, research on persuasion has been virtually nonexistent. I will present a series of studies examining the neural correlates of feeling persuaded, of
persuasion-induced attitude change and behavior change, and of message propagation from an initial
message recipient to other individuals (i.e. buzz, memes, sticky ideas). These studies highlight the
fundamentally social and self-related aspects of persuasion and suggest that fMRI can complement
traditional measurement techniques to increase the prediction of persuasion effects.

7

Session E: Poster Presentations
Saturday, October 10, 2009
4:00 PM – 5:30 PM
Abstracts pp. 12-29

Session F: Keynote Address
Saturday, October 10, 2009
5:30 PM – 6:30 PM
David Brooks, The New York Times

Session G: Development & Theory of Mind
Sunday, October 11, 2009
9:00 AM – 10:30 AM
Sarah-Jayne Blakemore, University College London
Jennifer Pfeifer, University of Oregon
Kevin N. Ochsner & Zamil Zaki, Columbia University
Eveline Crone, Leiden University

ABSTRACTS
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIAL BRAIN Sarah-Jayne Blakemore, University College
London – The “social brain” describes the network of brain regions involved in understanding others.
Behavior related to social cognition changes dramatically during human adolescence. This is paralleled
by both structural and functional changes in the social brain during this time. In particular, the medial
prefrontal cortex and superior temporal sulcus undergo changes in grey matter and white matter
volumes during adolescence. They also show altered activity during the performance of social cognitive
tasks between adolescence and adulthood. Recent behavioral evidence suggests that adolescence is also a
period in which performance on social cognitive tasks is still developing. In this talk, I bring together
two relatively new and rapidly expanding areas of neuroscience: social neuroscience and the
development of the brain during adolescence, in an attempt to evaluate how the social brain develops
during adolescence.

8

CHANGES IN THE BRAIN AND CHANGES IN BEHAVIOR: A LONGITUDINAL FMRI STUDY OF
SOCIAL COGNITIVE FUNCTIONING DURING THE TRANSITION TO ADOLESCENCE Jennifer
H. Pfeifer, Department of Psychology, University of Oregon; Tasha M. Oswald, Department of Psychology,
University of Oregon; Larissa A. Borofsky, Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California,
Los Angeles; Marco Iacoboni, Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California, Los Angeles;
John C. Mazziotta, Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California, Los Angeles; Mirella
Dapretto, Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California, Los Angeles - Several brain
regions have been identified that may play a critical role in processing the thoughts, feelings, and/or
intentions of others, including medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), temporal-parietal junction (TPJ), and the
putative human mirror neuron system (MNS). Further, the functioning of these structures is frequently
related to individual differences in things like mentalizing and interpersonal competence. Longitudinal
evidence of these brain-behavior relationships has yet to be amassed, but exploring them in such a way
may provide a deeper understanding of the neural networks that support social cognitive functioning
throughout development. At two timepoints separated by nearly three years, approximately 40
neurotypical children (aged 9.5-10.6 years at the first timepoint) underwent fMRI while observing
emotional facial expressions. Self- and parent-reports of attributes including empathy, perspectivetaking, resistance to peer influence, and interpersonal competence were obtained outside the scanner.
Longitudinal analyses were conducted by constructing functionally-independent ROIs based on
anatomy and putative Brodmann’s Areas, then extracting parameter estimates from these ROIs. These
data provide the first demonstration of longitudinal change in brain activity in relation to developmental
change in social cognitive functioning. Findings also highlight regions that may be critical to perspectivetaking during adolescence, including those both common to and distinct from ones previously identified
in the adult literature.

ACTIVITY OF DISSOCIABLE NEURAL SYSTEMS PREDICTS DECISIONS ABOUT COMPLEX
SOCIAL INFORMATION Jamil Zaki, Kelly Hennigan, Jochen Weber, & Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University
- Social information is complex and multimodal, involving visual and semantic components that often
present contradictory cues about people’s internal states. However, extant research on social cognition
has often used simplified stimuli that do not approximate real-world social information. Previous work
has identified two dissociable neural systems responsible for social cognition: the mirror neuron system,
which may support perception of the action intentions based on observed movements, and the
mentalizing system, which may support explicit attributions about mental states based on semantic
information. However, the way these systems interact during processing of realistic social cues is
unclear. In this study, we collected whole-brain fMRI data while participants watched silent videos of
targets describing emotional experiences, read sentences describing the target’s emotional experiences,
or saw both videos and sentences concurrently, and rated the emotion they believed targets were
experiencing. When both types of information were presented concurrently, videos and sentences were
sometimes congruent in valence, and sometimes incongruent. Watching target videos selectively
engaged the mirror neuron system, whereas reading semantic information selectively engaged the
mentalizing system. Combining both types of information engaged both systems more robustly than
either type of information taken alone. Furthermore, when the valence of the video and sentence
conflicted, engagement of the mirror neuron system predicted perceivers’ use of visual information in
making their rating, and engagement of the MPFC predicted their use of semantic information. These
results represent a step towards understanding the ways that neural systems interact in processing and
make decisions about complex social information.

SOCIAL DECISION-MAKING IN ADOLESCENCE: CHANGES IN BRAIN REGIONS
IMPORTANT FOR INTENTION CONSIDERATIONS Eveline Crone, Berna Guroglu, Wouter van den
Bos, Leiden University, The Netherlands - Changes in social cognition in adolescence have been well
documented, but it is not yet known how the maturation of social reasoning is related to changes in
brain function over the course of adolescent development. In two studies using functional magnetic
resonance imaging, we have found that between ages 12 and 25 adolescent are increasingly capably of
understanding intentions of others in social exchanges using economic decision-making games (Trust
and Ultimatum Game). Associated with these developmental differences, we have observed changes in
activation in regions previously implicated in social understanding, including anterior medial prefrontal

9

cortex, the insula and the temporal parietal junction. Based on these studies, we hypothesize that the
age-related changes in intention consideration result from slow and asynchronous maturation of brain
regions which are important for social cognition.

Session H: Poster Presentations
Sunday, October 11, 2009
10:30 AM – 12:00 PM
Abstracts pp. 30-45

Session I:

Culture & Intergroup Relations
Sunday, October 11, 2009
1:30 PM – 3:15 PM
Eric Vanman, University of Queensland
Belle Derks, Leiden University
Shihui Han, Peking University
Shinobu Kitayama, University of Michigan

ABSTRACTS
A NEURAL SUBSTRATE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT RACIAL
PREJUDICES IN WHITE AND AFRICAN AMERICAN PARTICIPANTS Eric J. Vanman, University of
Queensland; John P. Ryan, Georgia State University; Michael Philipp, University of Queensland; Tricia Z. King,
Georgia State University - This study examined neural mechanisms that underlie the relationship between
implicit and explicit measures of racial prejudice. In the first testing session, 11 White participants and 9
African American participants rated photos of White and Black faces for liking while facial EMG was
recorded to measure affective responses. Analyses revealed that White participants showed more EMG
bias against outgroup targets (Black faces), but reported more liking for them as well. Black participants
also showed more EMG bias against the outgroup (White faces), but reported less liking for those
targets. In a separate fMRI testng session, these same participants categorized another set of photographs
by race. White participants who had exhibited a greater discrepancy between the implicit and explicit
measures of Session 1 showed greater levels of bold activity in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
whereas African American participants did not. These data support a cognitive conflict model of
prejudice based on contemporary social and personal motivations to manage one's own prejudices.
THE EYE OF THE BEHOLDER: STEREOTYPE THREAT INCREASES ATTENTION TOWARD
REJECTION-RELATED CUES Belle Derks, Leiden University, the Netherlands; Michael Inzlicht, University of

10

Toronto; Cheryl Kaiser, University of Washington - Stereotype threat is the anxious expectation of
confirming negative stereotypes about ones group. Previous work has suggested that stereotype threat
causes individuals to vigilantly scan their environment for cues that signal failure or rejection by others.
Using ERP measures, the present study investigated whether women pay more attention to facial
expressions signaling rejection when they experience stereotype threat. Female participants (N = 40)
performed a task that was either presented as diagnostic of math ability (stereotype threat) or
‘attentional flexibility’ (control). An attention-shifting paradigm was used in which every math equation
was preceded with a dot-probe task in which participants detected dots on faces displaying happy,
angry or contemptuous expressions. Although these emotional stimuli were irrelevant to the math task,
N2 amplitude revealed that attention to expressions was modulated by stereotype threat. Whereas
participants in the control condition did not differentiate between expressions, participants under
stereotype threat paid most attention to faces displaying contempt (but not anger). These results indicate
that stereotype threat instills a vigilance for rejection-related cues, even when these cues are completely
task irrelevant. Moreover, the modulation of attention by context and emotional expression occurred
very early in information processing, underlying the relatively automatic nature of this process. The
implications of these results for stereotype threat theory are discussed.

DO YOU FEEL MY PAIN? RACIAL GROUP MEMBERSHIP MODULATES EMPATHIC NEURAL
RESPONSES Shihui Han, Xiaojing Xu, Xiangyu Zuo, Xiaoying Wang, Department of Psychology, Peking
University; Department of Radiology, Peking University First Hospital - Empathy plays a pivotal role in
human social behaviors and is influenced by social relations. However, the neural mechanism
underlying the interaction of empathy and social link remains unknown. To investigate how empathic
neural responses to perceived pain in others are modulated by racial in-group/out-group relationship,
we scanned Caucasian and Chinese participants using functional magnetic resonance imaging while
they watched video clips of Caucasian and Chinese faces receiving painful or non-painful stimulations.
We found that that, while painful stimulations applied to racial in-group faces induced increased
activations in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and inferior frontal/insula cortex in both Caucasians
and Chinese, the empathic neural response in the ACC decreased significantly when participants viewed
faces of other races. Our findings uncover neural mechanisms of an empathic bias towards racial ingroup members.

CHOICE RESULTS IN ENHANCED SELF-RELEVANCE AND HEDONIC VALUE: AN FMRI
STUDY OF POST-DECISIONAL DISSONANCE EFFECT IN CHINA Shinobu Kitayama, University of
Michigan; Shihui Han, Peking University; Sasha Kimel, University of Michigan; Jungan Qin, Peking University After having made a choice between two equally attractive items, people typically report a greater
preference for the chosen over rejected item. The choice may be hypothesized to change the hedonic
values of the items involved, their self-relevance, or both. The present fMRI study tested 12 Chinese
young adults, who first ranked 60 popular music CDs into 10 groups of equal size. They then performed
a series of choices between two equally ranked CDs. Participants were scanned both before and after the
choice while reporting 1) their preference for each of the 60 CDs and 2) their judgment of whether each
CD was recent or old. Patterns of brain activation in the preference (relative to recency) judgment were
assessed. Consistent with a recent British study (Sharot et al., 2009), we found that even though the
choice items were equally ranked they in fact varied in the degree to which they activated a
dopaminergic target area (i.e., the nucleus accumbens; NAcc), which in turn predicted subsequent
choice. Unlike the Sharot et al. study, however, we showed that after the choice the chosen item was
associated with a significant increase of medial prefrontal cortex activation, which in turn was associated
with post-choice ranking change. Yet, no increase in activation of the NAcc was associated with chosen
items. The results were interpreted in light of both some significant procedural differences between the
two studies and recent cross-cultural behavioral evidence concerning choice effect on value and selfrelevance.

11

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

Poster Session E

dominance/subordination and measured neural responses
using fMRI to dominant and subordinate stimuli. In the
scanner, participants passively viewed images of dominant
and subordinate displays of the body. After the scan,
participants completed a questionnaire indexing behavioral
tendencies towards dominance/subordination (e.g., "I
impose my will on others."). In Americans, dominant
stimuli selectively engaged the caudate nucleus, bilaterally,
and the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), whereas these
same regions were selectively engaged by subordinate
stimuli in Japanese. Correspondingly, Americans selfreported a tendency towards more dominant behavior,
whereas Japanese self-reported a tendency towards more
subordinate behavior. Moreover, activity in the right
caudate and mPFC correlated with behavioral tendencies
towards dominance/subordination, such that stronger
responses in the caudate and mPFC to dominant stimuli
were associated with more dominant behavior and stronger
responses in the caudate and mPFC to subordinate stimuli
were associated with more subordinate behavior. The
findings provide a first demonstration that culture can
flexibly shape functional activity in the mesolimbic reward
system, which in turn may guide behavior.

E1
RED SOX V. YANKEES: FMRI INVESTIGATION OF
PAIN AND PLEASURE RESPONSES TO A RIVAL
GROUP’S OUTCOMES Mina Cikara, Princeton University;
Mathew M. Botvinick, Princeton University; Susan T. Fiske,
Princeton University – Because competitive groups’
misfortunes imply own-group’s relative gain, outgroups’
misfortunes can engender pleasure. Pleasure at others’
misfortunes, Schadenfreude, may inhibit empathy towards
groups in need, at best allowing indifference toward their
suffering, and at worst facilitating active harm. In the
current fMRI study, 10 Red Sox and 6 Yankees fans watched
baseball plays featuring their favored teams and rivals
playing one another and a neutral third team, the Orioles.
After each play, participants reported pleasure, anger, and
pain in response to the play’s outcome. Favored teamsuccess, rival-failure, and rival-failure against the neutral
team (pure Schadenfreude) all elicited significantly more
pleasure than the control condition (Orioles v. Blue Jays).
Favored team-failure and rival-success elicited significantly
more anger and pain than the control condition. Regions of
the ventral striatum putamen, nucleus accumbens were
activated by ‘pleasurable’ baseball plays as compared to the
control; putamen activation correlated with subjective
ratings of pleasure. Also, activation in anterior cingulate
cortex and insula, regions part of a well-established pain
network, corresponded to ‘painful’ baseball plays; insula
activation correlated with subjective ratings of pain, but not
anger. These results suggest that evolutionarily old brain
systems, which also respond selectively to more basic
reinforcers and punishments (e.g., juice, pain, respectively),
may have adapted to integrate information about rewards
as abstract as favored group-identity and positive and
negative outcomes in intergroup competition. This is the
first study of which we are aware to investigate the
neurobiological correlates of group-identity based pleasure
and pain.

E3
A CROSS-CULTURAL COMPARISON OF SEMANTIC
JUDGMENTS Angela Gutchess, Brandeis University, Trey
Hedden, Massachusetts Institute of Technology & Massachusetts
General Hospital, Sarah Ketay, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
Arthur Aron, State University of New York at Stony Brook, John
D. E. Gabrieli, Massachusetts Institute of Technology – Recent
evidence suggests that culture can operate as a lens,
bringing distinct aspects of one’s environment into focus
and guiding information processing strategies based on
cultural priorities, values, and experiences. The current
study employed functional MRI to investigate the
contribution of domain-general (e.g., executive functions)
and domain-specific (e.g., semantic knowledge) processes to
differences in semantic judgments across cultures. Previous
behavioral experiments identified cross-cultural differences
in categorization, with East Asians preferring a strategy
based on thematic or functional relationships (e.g., cowgrass) and Americans relying on a strategy based on
categorical relationships (e.g., cow-chicken). East Asians and
American participants underwent scanning while
alternating between categorical or thematic strategies to sort
triads of words, as well as matching words on control trials.
Across both category and relationship trials, compared to
match (control) trials, East Asians activated a frontalparietal network implicated in controlled executive
processes, whereas Americans engaged regions of the
temporal lobes and the cingulate, possibly in response to
conflict in the semantic content of information. The results
suggest that cultures differ in the ways that they resolve
conflict between competing semantic judgments.

E2
CULTURE SHAPES A MESOLIMBIC RESPONSE TO
SIGNALS OF DOMINANCE AND SUBORDINATION
THAT ASSOCIATES WITH BEHAVIOR Jonathan B.
Freeman, Tufts University; Nicholas O. Rule, Tufts University;
Reginald B. Adams Jr., The Pennsylvania State University;
Nalini Ambady, Tufts University – It has long been
understood that culture shapes individuals’ behavior, but
how this is accomplished in the human brain has remained
largely unknown. The mesolimbic reward system likely
plays an important role, yet it is unknown whether
mesolimbic activity may be shaped by human culture. To
examine this, we made use of a well-established crosscultural difference in behavior: American culture tends to
reinforce dominant behavior whereas Japanese culture
tends to reinforce subordinate behavior. In 17 Americans
and 17 Japanese, we assessed behavioral tendencies towards

12

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

E4
THE CLOSED CIRCLE OF EMPATHY: OUTGROUPS DO
NOT
ACTIVATE
THE
NEURAL
NETWORKS
ASSOCIATED WITH EMPATHY Michael Inzlicht,
University of Toronto; Jennifer Gutsell, University of Toronto –
Empathy facilitates prosocial behavior and social
understanding. Here, however, we suggest that empathy is
limited: the neural system underlying empathy is less
responsive
to
outgroups
than
ingroups.
This
unresponsiveness might create an emotional barrier
between groups leading to prejudice.
Using
electroencephalographic (EEG) oscillations as an index of
empathy and its underlying neural processes, we conducted
two separate studies. In Study 1, we measured Alpha
Asymmetry over the prefrontal cortices as participants
experienced emotions themselves or watched ingroup and
outgroup others experience emotions. In Study 2, we
measured motor neuron activity, defined as the suppression
of the Mu frequency over sensorimotor cortex, as
participants engaged in motor activity themselves or
watched ingroup and outgroup others engage in motor
activity. Results indicated that participants showed similar
patterns of activation when they felt sad or engaged in
motor activity as when they observed ingroup members feel
sad or engage in motor activities. In contrast, participants
did not show activation of similar networks for outgroup
members, thus suggesting that the basic processes
underlying empathy are less sensitive for outgroups.
Importantly, the vicarious activation of brain networks was
negatively correlated with prejudice, showing that the more
prejudiced people were, the less responsive they were to
outgroup member’s feelings and actions. These findings
provide evidence from brain activity for the concept of
bounded empathy: Empathy may be restricted to close
others and, without active effort, may not extend to
outgroups, thus making them likely targets for prejudice
and discrimination.

were given an implementation intention (“If I see a Black
person, then I will be more careful!”) or a comparable goal
intention for completing the task. The P200 ERP component
- which indexes early perceptual attention - was assessed in
response to White vs. Black targets in the task. The P200 was
larger to Black than White targets, replicating past work. In
the simple goal condition, the degree of this P200 race effect
predicted greater racial bias in task behavior. However, in
the implementation intention condition, the P200 race effect
predicted less racial bias. These findings suggest that
implementation intentions operate by tuning early attention
to racial cues that trigger pre-specified egalitarian
responses.
E6
N170 RESPONSES TO FACES PREDICT IMPLICIT
INGROUP FAVORITISM: EVIDENCE FROM A
MINIMAL GROUP STUDY Kyle G. Ratner, New York
University; David M. Amodio, New York University – People
typically favor members of their own group in evaluations
and behavior. This “ingroup favoritism” even occurs for
novel and arbitrary group distinctions, and it leads to
implicit positive evaluations of ingroup members. To
understand the mechanisms underlying this effect, we
examined the association between implicit evaluative bias
and differences in basic-level face perception of novel
ingroup vs. outgroup members. Using the minimal group
paradigm, we assigned participants to one of two
arbitrarily-defined groups. We then recorded event-related
potentials (ERPs) while participants viewed and categorized
faces of people identified as members of their novel ingroup
vs. outgroup. Next, participants completed a behavioral
measure of implicit evaluative bias toward the ingroup vs.
outgroup. Our analysis focused on the N170 component of
the ERP, which peaks in occipitotemporal scalp regions at
approximately 170 ms following face onset and is believed
to reflect the earliest stages of face perception. Larger N170
amplitudes to outgroup vs. ingroup faces predicted stronger
implicit ingroup favoritism on the behavioral measure of
implicit evaluation. These results suggest that mere group
membership affects face perception, which may then
contribute to the expression of positive ingroup bias in
behavior. By linking face perception to implicit evaluative
responses, these findings begin to provide new insight into
how group categorizations can shape social perceptions and
behaviors.

E5
STRATEGIES TO REDUCE IMPLICIT BIAS INVOLVE
EARLY ATTENTION TO RACIAL CUES: ROLE OF THE
P200 EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL Saaid A. Mendoza,
New York University; David M. Amodio, New York University –
In previous behavioral research, we showed that a specific
if-then plan that links the perception of a person’s race with
a specific response (i.e., an implementation intention) is
effective in reducing the expression of implicit racial bias. In
the present study, we examined the neurocognitive
mechanism underlying this effect. We hypothesized that
implementation intentions tune early perceptual processing
of race to trigger a planned, egalitarian response.
Participants completed the Shooter Task while event-related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded. The Shooter Task is a
reaction-time measure that requires one to decide quickly
whether to shoot Black or White male targets holding guns
or innocuous objects. This task typically elicits a pattern of
racial bias, whereby individuals are more likely to
mistakenly shoot unarmed Blacks than Whites. Participants

E7
SOCIAL IDENTITY ORGANIZES FACE PERCEPTION:
THE
FUSIFORM
FACE
AREA
RESPONDS
PREFERENTIALLY
TO
MEMBERS
OF
AN
EXPERIMENTALLY CREATED INGROUP Jay J Van Bavel,
The Ohio State University;
Dominic J. Packer, Lehigh
University; William A. Cunningham, The Ohio State University
– There has been extensive research on a region of the
fusiform gyrus that is critical for recognizing faces, termed
the fusiform face area (FFA). However, it remains an open
question whether the FFA is sensitive to shifting social

13

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

dynamics. One possibility is that facial processing in the
FFA may be relatively invariant and other neural systems
may be recruited to imbue faces with social meaning.
Another possibility is that social context may provide a
direct, top-down influence on representations in the FFA.
The current fMRI study explored the sensitivity of the FFA
to an experimentally created social identity. We assigned
participants to one of two arbitrary groups, then had them
visually identify ingroup and outgroup faces and complete
a FFA localizer during neuroimaging. The FFA was
selectively engaged during presentation of experimentally
created ingroup (> outgroup) faces, even when the
intergroup distinction was random, there were no visual
cues to distinguish group membership, and exposure to the
faces was equivalent, brief (~15 minutes) and recent. The
results suggest that a currently salient group membership,
however arbitrary, may recruit the FFA to visually identify
fellow group members in the absence of long-term
experience with that category. Although these results are
consistent with models suggesting that the FFA plays a
general role in subordinate processing of stimuli within a
category (Palmeri & Gauthier, 2004), our data suggest that
long-term experience is not necessary to engage these
processes. Instead, top-down influences like social identity
can influence FFA activity in a dynamic fashion.

comparisons can evoke changes in decision making as
evidenced by proposer behavior.
E9
YOU HAVE GREAT TASTE: NEURAL CODING OF
AGREEMENT WITH OTHERS ON MUSIC USING
REWARD
PATHWAYS
Daniel
Campbell-Meiklejohn,
University College London & Aarhus University; Dominik Bach,
University College London; Andreas Reopstorff, Aarhus
University; Chris Frith, University College London & Aarhus
University – With other people’s opinions, we learn about
our own preferences and the value of objects. We
hypothesized that learning the opinions of others involves
the same neural systems as learning about rewarding
outcomes. We asked 29 healthy, right-handed participants
to submit a list of any 20 desired songs that they did not yet
own. On test day, participants were told that two ‘expert’
music reviewers were asked for their preferences between
each of the submitted songs and various other songs,
unfamiliar to the participant. With event-related fMRI,
participants were asked to make the same choices as the
reviewers just before finding out what the reviewers would
have preferred. Each reviewer could agree or disagree with
the participant. Next, participants received a token for the
preferred or non-preferred song. Tokens increased the
likelihood of a song being received after the experiment.
Agreement and preferred token receipt were orthogonal by
design. Reviewer agreement (vs. disagreement) activated
known reward pathways in the ventral striatum which were
also activated by preferred (vs. non-preferred) song tokens.
Overall mean neural effects of agreement and token-reward
in overlapping areas were additive. This relationship could
potentially vary with susceptibility to reviewer influence.
Finally, both unanimous agreement and unanimous
disagreement among the reviewers (vs. two different
opinions) correlated with increased activity in anterior
insula cortex. These findings have fascinating implications
with regard to how we use and process the opinions of
others.

E8
SOCIAL COMPARISONS AND PROPOSER BEHAVIOR
IN THE ULTIMATUM GAME Swati Bhattacharya,
Department of Psychology, Rutgers University; Megan Schulze,
Department of Psychology, Rutgers University; Mauricio R.
Delgado, Department of Psychology, Rutgers University; –
Researchers have noted that dominance-related judgments
in social situations can be automatic (Moors & DeHouwer,
2005), but how these social comparisons influence decision
making is less clear. In this study, we induced comparison
through a novel game in which pairs of subjects were
divided into a high status (HS) and low status (LS) groups.
The HS subjects were given praise and a raffle ticket for a
desirable good (e.g., an ipod) as a status symbol while the
LS group received neither. After the manipulation, the LS
group rated themselves significantly lower than their
partners on a questionnaire typically used to measure
status, while the opposite was observed for the HS group.
Subjects then played the role of a proposer in a modified
version of an ultimatum game simultaneously with each
other. They proposed a division of monetary amounts that
varied with respect to value (from low to high
endowments). To motivate the subjects towards the task,
they were told that one of the offers would be randomly
chosen. If their chosen offer was accepted by their partner,
they would receive an additional raffle ticket, but if their
offer was rejected, neither would receive the additional
ticket. A significant interaction was observed between
value (high and low endowments) and status (LS and HS).
Specifically, the HS group proposed lower amounts
compared to the LS group, particularly when splitting larger
endowments. This study suggests that contextual

E10
THE NEURAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, AND ECONOMIC
BASES
OF
GUILT-AVERSION
IN
SOCIAL
INTERACTION Luke Chang, Alec Smith, Martin Dufwenberg,
& Alan Sanfey, University of Arizona Department of Psychology,
Tucson, AZ & University of Arizona Department of Economics,
Tucson, AZ – Previous work has demonstrated that guilt
often promotes reparative behavior following a social
transgression. However, no study to date has demonstrated
that guilt-aversion can motivate cooperative behavior.
Using a formal model of guilt developed within the context
of Psychological Game Theory, this study integrates theory
and methods from the diverse fields of psychology,
economics, and neuroscience to triangulate the neural
mechanisms that mediate cooperative behavior.
We
recruited 30 participants to play a modified single-shot
Trust Game, in which we also elicited beliefs about their
partners’ expectations. Seventeen of these participants

14

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

Cheryl L. Dickter, The College of William & Mary; Kyle T.
Gagnon, The College of William & Mary – Although much
psychophysiological research on social categorization has
demonstrated that participants attend to race early during
person perception, less research has investigated how
perceivers process information about multiple social
categories. The current study sought to investigate how race
and gender interact during early social categorization.
Specifically, by using early components of the ERP as
indexes of attention, this research examined how perceivers
allocate attention to multiple social categories (i.e., race and
gender). During a modified flanker paradigm, Black and
White participants completed a series of trials in which they
explicitly categorized the race of a target face presented on a
computer screen. These target faces were presented among
flanker faces that, on each trial, varied in compatibility with
the target face by race and gender. Event-related potentials
(ERPs) were measured in order to examine early attention to
race and gender information. Results indicated that
participants were sensitive to both the race and gender of
the targets, as seen by the behavioral and ERP data. Black
male targets yielded the quickest reaction times and the
largest N100 amplitudes than other targets. Additionally, a
significant interaction was found between target race and
participant race in the N200 component of the ERP,
supporting previous research indicating that the social
group of the perceiver may play an important role during
social categorization. In conclusion, this study indicates that
perceivers distinguish between multiple social category
information early in processing and that this distinction
may have implications for later behavior.

underwent fMRI while they decided whether or not to
reciprocate their partner’s trust. Our model was not only
able to successfully predict participant’s behavior, but it also
revealed that participants demonstrated increased
activation in the insula and DACC/SMA when they were
behaving in a manner consistent with our model of guilt
aversion, and exhibited increased activity in the vmPFC
when they returned less money then they believed their
partner expected. Insula activity correlated with selfreported counterfactual guilt, providing further support of
its role in promoting social cooperation via a guilt-aversion
mechanism. This study demonstrates how the strengths of
psychology, economics, and neuroscience can be integrated
to study high-level social processes. More specifically, we
demonstrate that the predictive power of economic models
can be dramatically improved by incorporating
psychological principles and that the use of formal models
can allow more specific inquiry into the neural
computations underlying high level cognitive and affective
processes.
E11
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL
EVIDENCE
SUGGESTING VOTERS REMEMBER POLITICAL
EVENTS THAT NEVER HAPPENED Jason Coronel,
University of Illinois; Brian Gonsalves, University of Illinois;
Kara Federmeier, University of Illinois – Voters with high
levels of political knowledge tend to misattribute issue
positions that are consistent with a candidate's party
affiliation, even when the candidate has never explicitly
stated or endorsed such issue positions. There are at least
two possible explanations that account for this political
puzzle. The first explanation points to an inference-based
process. According to this account, knowledgeable voters
use prior information about a candidate, such as his or her
party affiliation, to make an educated guess as to whether a
candidate has explicitly endorsed a particular issue. The
second explanation points to a false memory-based process.
In this scenario, a voter's schema-based memory of a
Democrat and a Republican candidate are sufficiently
developed that knowledge of some of a candidate's issue
positions can lead to the implicit generation of other, related
positions. In order to examine the mechanism underlying
the misattribution phenomenon, event-related potentials
were used in a study-recognition test paradigm where
participants learned about novel political candidates. The
N400 and the LPC were used as measures of implicit and
explicit memory, respectively, in order to determine
whether the issue misattributions were the result of an
inference or a false memory-based process. Results show
that responses to misattributed issues elicited implicit
memory signals similar to that of old correctly remembered
issues, indicating the formation of false memories.

E13
MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVITY WHEN
EVALUATING OTHERS DEPENDS ON THEIR FACIAL
EXPRESSION AND AGE Natalie C. Ebner, Yale University;
Sebastian Gluth, Max Planck Institute for Human Development
and Humboldt University; Matthew R. Johnson, Yale University;
Carol L. Raye, Yale University; Marcia K. Johnson, Yale
University – Medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) activity is
associated with self-referential thinking (Johnson et al., 2006;
Mitchell, Macrae, & Banaji, 2006). Furthermore, thinking
about oneself and similar others is associated with ventral
mPFC activity, whereas thinking about dissimilar others is
associated with more dorsal mPFC activity (Mitchell et al.,
2006). The present functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) study examined whether evaluation of persons with
different expressions and of different ages differentially
engaged self-referential thinking. Young and older
participants saw neutral, angry, and happy young and older
individuals’ faces, and were asked to judge each person in
terms of various personality characteristics. In a post-scan
session, participants indicated how similar they felt to each
person. Preliminary analyses suggest that evaluation of
persons with happy compared to angry expressions
engaged a more ventral region of mPFC, whereas
evaluation of persons with angry compared to happy
expressions engaged a more dorsal region of mPFC in both

E12
EARLY
ERP
NEGATIVITY
DURING
CATEGORIZATION AS EVIDENCE FOR PERCEIVER
AWARENESS OF MULTIPLE SOCIAL CATEGORIES

15

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

young and older participants. In addition, participants
reported being more similar to happy than angry persons. A
similar dissociative pattern emerged for judgments of
young and older persons. This suggests that more selfreferential thinking is involved when mentalizing about
happy than angry and about young than older persons.

and played for additional subjects who decided, based on
the interviews, whether they would produce the show, and
in turn whether they would pass the information on to
others. Video interviews were also coded along a number
of dimensions related to successful message propagation
(e.g. accuracy, enthusiasm). Across several measures of
successful message propagation, increased activity in
regions associated with social cognition and mentalizing
was associated with successful message propagation.
Several measures of successful message propagation were
also associated with increased activity in regions associated
with self-referential processing. These findings build on
previous work exploring the neural bases of persuasion, and
extend it to include the important follow-up behaviors that
ultimately result in the spread of information and attitudes.

E14
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ANXIETY AND
DIRECTION OF GAZE PREDICT THE AMYGDALA
RESPONSE TO FACIAL SIGNALS OF THREAT Michael
P. Ewbank, MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge,
UK; Elaine Fox, Department of Psychology, University of Essex,
UK; Andrew J. Calder, MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, UK – Angry and fearful facial expressions
represent two qualitatively different forms of threat. Fearful
faces have been proposed to signal the presence of an
undetermined source of danger within the environment,
referred to as ‘ambiguous threat’, while angry faces
represent a more direct form of threat, often used in face-toface encounters. Behavioral evidence shows that angry facial
expressions are perceived as more threatening, and elicit
greater anxiety, when their gaze is directed at, rather than
away from the observer. By contrast, the influence of gaze
on the processing of fearful faces is considerably less
consistent, with a number of studies showing no effect of
gaze on the perceived intensity of threat. Using fMRI, we
addressed the influence of gaze on the neural response to
these two expressions, taking account of recent evidence
showing that the amygdala response to signals of threat is
determined by participants’ level of anxiety. We found that
the amygdala response to direct, but not averted gaze angry
faces increased as a function of anxiety. For fearful
expressions, however, we found amygdala correlations with
anxiety irrespective of gaze direction. In addition, the effects
of anxiety and gaze on emotional intensity ratings of the
faces mirrored the effects found in the amygdala. Our
results are difficult to reconcile with the proposal that the
amygdala is preferentially involved in the processing of
ambiguous threat, and accord more with the suggestion that
the this region is involved in coding threat signals with
personal relevance.

E16
INTEREST IN POLITICS MODULATES NEURAL
ACTIVITY IN THE AMYGDALA AND VENTRAL
STRIATUM Marta Gozzi, Cognitive Neuroscience Section,
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National
Institutes of Health; Dipartimento di Psicologia, Universite di
Milano Bicocca; Pediatrics & Developmental Neuroscience
Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes
of Health; Giovanna Zamboni, Cognitive Neuroscience Section,
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National
Institutes of Health; Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Universite di
Modena e Reggio Emilia Frank Krueger, Cognitive Neuroscience
Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
National Institutes of Health; Department of Molecular
Neuroscience, Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study, George
Mason University Jordan Grafman, Cognitive Neuroscience
Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
National Institutes of Health – Studies on political
participation have found that a person’s interest in politics
contributes to the likelihood that he or she will be involved
in the political process. Here, we looked at whether interest
in politics affects patterns of brain activity when individuals
think about political matters. Using functional magnetic
resonance (fMRI), we scanned 25 individuals (either
interested or uninterested in politics based on a self report
questionnaire) while they were expressing their agreement
or disagreement with political opinions (e.g., “The law
should strictly control immigration”). After scanning,
participants were asked to rate each political statement
presented in the scanner for emotional valence and
emotional intensity. Behavioral results showed that those
political opinions participants agreed with were perceived
as more emotionally intense and more positive by
individuals interested in politics relative to individuals
uninterested in politics. In addition, individuals interested
in politics showed greater activation in the amygdala and
ventral striatum relative to individuals uninterested in
politics when reading political opinions in accordance with
their own views. Our results cannot be attributed to factors
such as gender and political orientation. First, the two
groups did not differ in demographic (gender, age,
education, income) or political characteristics (political

E15
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERSUASION AND
MESSAGE PROPAGATION Emily Falk, Sylvia Morelli,
Locke Welborn, & Matthew Lieberman, University of California,
Los Angeles – Information exchange is at the heart of social
interaction and can result in the spread of important
attitudes and behaviors. Here, we present an fMRI study
that begins to address the previously unexplored
neurocognitive
mechanisms
underlying
message
propagation following a persuasive communication. Each
participant was scanned while acting as the middle link in a
modified "telephone" game. Participants were asked to
pretend that they were interns at a television studio and
were in charge of passing show proposals on to their boss
(the producer). Post-scan interviews were video-recorded

16

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

orientation and party affiliation). Second, gender and
political orientation were included as nuisance covariates in
the fMRI data analysis. The present study shows that having
an interest in politics elicits activations in emotion- and
reward-related brain areas even when simply agreeing with
written political statements.

of information for younger and older adults, the response of
the region during encoding of self-referenced information
varies across younger and older adults in unexpected ways.
We sought to determine the extent to which interference
between conditions (the self, other, and case judgments
used in previous studies) and low numbers of forgotten
items contributed to previous patterns of age differences in
neural activity during the encoding of self-referenced
information. During an fMRI session, fifteen young adults
and seventeen older adults incidentally encoded 144
adjectives using a self-reference task (i.e., does this adjective
describe me?) and received a surprise memory test outside
of the scanner. For items later recalled compared to those
later forgotten (Dm analysis), young adults tend to engage
orbitofrontal gyrus more than older adults, likely reflecting
orientation to the emotional aspects of the task. In contrast,
older adults engaged the lingual gyrus more than young,
reflecting their greater attention to visual aspects of the task.
We conclude that based on a free recall measure, age groups
differ in the processes that support encoding of information
into memory. Further analyses based on a recognition
measure will further delineate the contribution of
interference to age differences in task performance and
neural activity, compared to previous studies.

E17
LONELINESS AND SOCIAL NETWORK SIZE IN
PATIENTS WITH HIPPOCAMPAL AMNESIA Rupa
Gupta, University of Iowa; Janelle N. Beadle, University of Iowa;
Rachael Rubin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign;
Brooke Bachelder, University of Iowa; Neal J. Cohen, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Daniel Tranel, University of
Iowa; Melissa C. Duff, University of Iowa – Memory
impairments after brain damage result in profound changes
in numerous domains of everyday life. Case descriptions
suggest that memory-impaired patients tend to be socially
isolated and have impoverished social networks and
relationships (Tate, 2002; O’Connor et al., 1995). Here, we
examine self-reports of two aspects of social isolation:
“objective” social isolation, as measured by social network
size, and “perceived” social isolation, as measured by
loneliness (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008), in 4 patients (1
female) with bilateral hippocampal damage due to
anoxia/HSE. These patients have severe declarative
memory impairments (WMS-III General Memory Index
M=63), which are sufficiently severe to interfere with
activities of daily life, including preventing them from
independent living or employment since the onset of their
amnesia. The amnesic participants have smaller social
networks (e.g., the number of people they talk to at least
once every two weeks; Cohen et al., 1997) than age-, sex-,
and education-matched healthy comparison participants
(M=8 vs. 18 people, respectively), however, the amnesic
participants’ reports are higher than collateral reports from
their family members (M=8 vs. 3 people, respectively).
Moreover, three of the four amnesic participants do not
report having more loneliness than matched comparison
participants as assessed by the UCLA-R Loneliness Scale
(Russell, 1996); however, differences in level of insight for
the severity of their memory impairment may influence
reported loneliness. These results suggest that while
patients with hippocampal amnesia are more socially
isolated than healthy comparisons, their memory
impairments may preclude them from fully apprehending
the extent of their social isolation.

E19
DIFFERENTIAL
NEURAL
CONNECTIVITY
IN
PROCESSING SAME- AND OTHER-RACE FACES Yi He,
Yale University; Marcia K. Johnson, Yale University; Gregory
McCarthy, Yale University – We investigated the influence of
race on face processing using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). Twenty White participants viewed faces
from their same-race (White) and two other-races (Asian
and Black) while engaged in a gender discrimination task.
At the conclusion of this fMRI task, participants were given
implicit association tests (IAT) for Black-White and AsianWhite. The results from a separate face/scene localizer task
were used to individually define six face-sensitive regions,
located in bilateral occipital, fusiform, and superior
temporal cortices. The left occipital face-sensitive area had
greater activation to faces from both other-races when
compared to same-race faces, and this difference was largest
between Black and White faces. The right superior temporal
face-sensitive area had greater activation to White faces than
Black faces. Activation in the right fusiform face-sensitive
area was correlated with the IAT, with participants who
showed positive associations of White greater than Asian
exhibiting greater activation to White than Asian faces. A
psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis was
conducted to examine if connectivity between the amygdala
and other brain regions was influenced by the race of the
faces viewed by the participants. The results of the PPI
analysis revealed greater connectivity between the right
amygdala and anterior cingulate and inferior temporal
regions for White than Black faces, and greater connectivity
between right amygdala and inferior frontal, frontal polar
and precentral regions for Black than White faces.

E18
AGE
DIFFERENCES
IN
SELF-REFERENCING:
EVIDENCE FOR DISTINCT ENCODING STRATEGIES
Angela Gutchess, Rebecca Sokal, Jennifer A. Coleman, & Gina
Gotthilf, Brandeis University – Self-referencing is a strategy
that supports deep elaborative encoding of information into
memory. Recent evidence indicates that this strategy also
benefits older adults, who are particularly prone to longterm memory problems with age. Although engagement of
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) underlies self-referencing

17

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

E20
SUBLIMINAL PRESENTATION OF OTHER-FACE (BUT
NOT SELF-FACE) PRIMES SEMANTIC PROCESSING
OF PAINFUL EXPRESSIONS Esteban Hurtado, Alejandro
Lobos, Josefina Escobar, Natalia Trujillo, Agustin Ibanez.
Neuroscience Laboratory, University Diego Portales, Santiago,
Chile Institute of Cognitive Neurology (INECO), Buenos Aires,
Argentina Neuroscience Group, University of Antioquia,
Medellan, Colombia P. Catholic University of Chile, Santiago,
Chile Department of Psychology, Department of Psychiatry, and
Center for Cognitive and Social Neuroscience, The University of
Chicago, USA – Currently research on empathy for the pain
accentuates the neural overlap of the first-hand experience
of pain and its perception in others. Nevertheless, on a
recent study of priming faces with like or dislike semantic
information, Yamada & Decety (2009) found evidence that
suggested a pain processing as threat value rather than an
automatic empathic resonance. In this line, pain processing
of other-related information (and not self-related
information) could imply danger and not empathy, because
of the possible threat represented in others (especially if
associated to pain stimuli). In order to test this hypothesis,
neutral and painful semantic expressions previously primed
with self or other faces were presented. Only the detection
of painful expressions was facilitated when other-face
priming were used. In addition, painful expressions were
processed quickly when they were formulated in third
person (and not first person). This result put forward the
threat value of pain hypothesis and promotes the future
inclusion of self vs. other related-information in pain
research.

perspectives. Normative data collected to assess the
recognisability of the stimuli suggest that for most action
stimuli motor information in point-light-displays was
sufficient to clearly recognize the action as communicative
as well as to identify the specific communicative gesture
performed by the actor. These findings are discussed in
light of motor theories of social cognition. Finally, we
present preliminary data concerning the possible
applications of communicative point-light stimuli in
perceptual masking experiments.
E22
NEURAL SENSITIVITY TO PEER REJECTION DURING
ADOLESCENCE: LONGITUDINAL LINKS WITH
DEPRESSION Carrie Masten, University of California, Los
Angeles; Naomi I. Eisenberger, University of California, Los
Angeles; Mirella Dapretto, University of California, Los Angeles
– Extensive developmental research has linked peer
rejection
during
adolescence
with
a
host
of
psychopathological outcomes, including depression.
Moreover, neuroimaging research from our lab has
suggested that increased activity in the subgenual region of
the anterior cingulate (subACC), which has been previously
linked with depression symptomatology (e.g., Keedwell et
al., 2008), is related to greater distress resulting from
simulated peer rejection among adolescents (Masten et al.,
in press). In the current study, our goal was to assess the
relationship between neural sensitivity to peer rejection and
the onset of depression symptomatology during
adolescence. During an fMRI scan, 20 adolescents (13 girls,
mean age 13.0) were excluded during a ball-tossing game in
which they believed they were playing with two other
adolescents, who were actually computer-controlled. Both at
the time of the scan, and one-year later at age 14,
participants’ depression symptoms were assessed via
parental reports using the Childhood Behavior Checklist.
Although there was no association between neural
sensitivity to exclusion and depression at age 13, both
whole-brain and region of interest regression analyses
indicated that subACC activity during exclusion was
associated with depression symptoms at age 14, controlling
for symptoms at age 13. In other words, adolescents who
displayed heightened subACC activity in response to
simulated peer exclusion showed a prospective increase in
depression symptomatology the following year. As a whole,
these findings have implications for understanding the
relationship between sensitivity to peer rejection and the
increased risk of depression that occurs during adolescence.

E21
INFERRING COMMUNICATIVE INTENTION FROM
MOTOR INFORMATION: A POINT-LIGHT STUDY
Valeria Manera, Center for Cognitive Science, Department of
Psychology, University of Turin; Cristina Becchio, Center for
Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology, University of
Turin; Ben Schouten, Laboratory of Experimental Psychology,
University of Leuven; Karl Verfaillie, Laboratory of Experimental
Psychology, University of Leuven; Bruno G. Bara, Center for
Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology, University of
Turin – In everyday life interactions, many cues are
available for learning about peoples’ communicative
intentions. Here we used the point-light technique to test
whether communicative intention might be inferred from
movement information alone. Point-light stimuli represent
the movements of a body through a small number of point
lights indicating the major joints of a moving person.
Despite this drastic degradation of the stimulus, motor
information available has proven to be sufficient for
recognizing actions, for determining the identity of a figure,
as well as his/her gender, age and emotional state (see
Vanrie and Verfaillie 2004). In the present study, motion
capture techniques and animation software (Dekeyser,
Verfaillie, and Vanrie, 2002) were combined to create a
database of 20 communicative interactions performed by a
male and by a female couple as seen from different visual

E23
THE NEURAL CONSEQUENCES OF PERSPECTIVETAKING ON PERCEPTIONS OF FAIRNESS Sylvia
Morelli, University of California, Los Angeles; Austin Grinberg,
University of California, Los Angeles; Meghan Meyer, University
of California, Los Angeles; Matthew D. Lieberman, University of
California, Los Angeles – Our study explores the neural
consequences of perspective-taking, examining whether

18

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

E25
USING THE SELF TO UNDERSTAND OTHERS: MPFC
SUBSERVES ANCHORING-AND-ADJUSTMENT IN
SOCIAL INFERENCE Diana Tamir, Harvard University;
Jason Mitchell, Harvard University – Neuroimaging research
into social cognition has repeatedly implicated the medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) in solving social inference
problems. The mPFC has also been implicated in processing
information about the self. This neural overlap has been
taken as evidence for simulation theory, which suggests that
one way in which people understand the minds of other
people is by first accessing their own mental states, and then
correcting for dissimilarities between the self and the other.
The goal of this study was to find neural evidence for the
role of self information and for the corrective process of
adjustment away from this self information during social
inferences. To do this, we analyzed functional data from
sixty-four subjects from four experimental designs, each
requiring participants to respond to statements about their
own preferences and to make inferences about those same
preferences for other individuals. For each statement, an
adjustment score was calculated as the absolute difference
between responses to that statement for the Self and for the
Other targets. This adjustment score was used in a
parametric analysis that identified neural regions sensitive
to the distance between one's judgment of another person
and one's own self-reported preference. Two regions in the
mPFC were found to be specifically correlated with
adjustment during Other trials. These results suggest that
the mPFC contributes not only to the generation of selfreflective information but the use of that information to
judge other minds.

perspective-taking biases later perceptions of the fairness of
the person’s actions. Participants began with a perspectivetaking induction in which they viewed a photo of an
individual (PT player) and read two first-person passages
that described the person’s thoughts and emotions during
everyday situations. Next, participants watched the PT
player play a series of Ultimatum Games against two other
unknown players. Each Ultimatum Game showed two
players, the sum of money they had to split, and then the
offer one player made the other. Participants saw players
make offers from 20% to 50% of the total stake, then judged
how fair the offer was for each game. Initial results from 18
participants show that neural activation occurs in the dorsal
medial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) during the perspectivetaking induction (relative to neutral passages), as well as
when participants later view that same person responding
to offers in the Ultimatum game (relative to when they see
an unknown player). Behavioral responses show that
perspective-taking biases participants to perceive offers as
fairer when the PT player proposes the offer compared to
when a neutral player proposes the same offer. When the PT
player receives an offer, the offer is viewed as less fair
compared to when a neutral player receives the same offer.
These results suggest that perspective-taking may have
lasting neural and behavioral consequences, causing people
to naturally take someone’s perspective in later interactions
and creating biases in their perceptions of fairness.
E24
THE POWER OF CHARISMA: PERCEIVED CHARISMA
INHIBITS THE ATTENTIONAL AND EXECUTIVE
SYSTEMS OF BELIEVERS IN INTERCESSORY PRAYER
Uffe Schjoedt, Aarhus University; Hans Stodkilde-Jorgensen,
Aarhus University Hospital; Armin W. Geertz, Aarhus
University; Torben E. Lund, Aarhus University Hospital;
Andreas Roepstorff, Aarhus University Hospital – The study
presented used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to investigate how assumptions about speakers’
abilities changed the evoked BOLD response in secular and
Christian participants who received intercessory prayer. In a
randomized design the study found that assumptions about
the speaker’s healing abilities had significant effects on the
Christian participants only. Most notably, they deactivated
the frontal executive network consisting of the medial and
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex bilaterally in response to
speakers who they believed had healing abilities. An
independent analysis across subjects revealed that this
deactivation predicted the participants’ subsequent ratings
of the speakers’ charisma. We argue that this relation may
point to an important mechanism of authority which is
ubiquitously present in interpersonal interactions, e.g. in
leader-follower, doctor-patient, teacher-student, and parentchild relations. The fact that only Christian participants
responded according to the speakers’ abilities indicates that
the power of authority depends on beliefs and expectations
which are specific to a group or culture.

E26
UNDERSTANDING
OTHERS'
ACTIONS
AND
INTENTIONS BY MIRROR AND MENTALIZING
SYSTEMS: A META-ANALYSIS Frank Van Overwalle, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Belgium; Kris Baetens, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Belgium – This meta-analysis explores the role of the
mirror and mentalizing networks in the process of
understanding other people's action intentions. On the basis
of over 200 fMRI studies, this analysis demonstrates that the
mirror network, consisting of the anterior intraparietal
sulcus and the premotor cortex, is engaged when one
perceives articulated motions of body parts, irrespective of
their sensory (visual or auditory) or verbal format.
Observations of whole-body motions and gaze engage the
posterior superior temporal sulcus and most likely reflect an
orientation response in line with the action or attention of
the observed actor. In contrast, the mentalizing network,
consisting of the temporo-parietal junction, the medial
prefrontal cortex and the precuneus, becomes active when
there is no input on a moving body, such as when
geometrical shapes are seen moving in a human-like fashion
or when behaviors implying inferences such as goals, beliefs
or moral issues are described in abstract (e.g., verbal) terms.
Comparisons with other, non-social tasks (e.g., Posner's
cuing task) suggest that the temporo-parietal junction

19

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

computes the orientation or direction of the behavior in
order to predict its likely end-state (or goal). Neither
network subserves the other, they are complementary. The
evidence, however, suggests a transition from the mirror to
the mentalizing system even in the face of body part
motions when perceivers consciously deliberate about the
others' intentions and their behavioral executions, such as
when perceived body motions are incorrect, implausible or
pretended.

numerous areas of this putative reward circuit. Parametric
analyses employing orthogonal linear and nonlinear
regressors revealed positive nonlinear effects in anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC),
amygdala (AMY), lateral
orbitofrontal cortex (LOFC), ventral striatum (nucleus
accumbens (NAC), caudate, putamen), and ventral
tegmental area (VTA), in addition to replicating previously
documented linear effects in MOFC and LOFC. The
ubiquitous nonlinear responses are consistent both with
single cell recordings in animals showing responses to both
rewarding and aversive stimuli and some human fMRI
investigations of non-face stimuli. They indicate that the
reward circuit does not process face valence with any
simple dissociation of function across structures. Perceiver
gender modulated some responses to our male faces:
women showed stronger linear effects, and men showed
stronger nonlinear effects, which may have functional
implications. Our discovery of nonlinear responses to
attractiveness throughout the reward circuit echoes the
history of amygdala research: early work indicated a linear
response to threatening stimuli, including faces; later work
also revealed a nonlinear response with heightened
activation to affectively salient stimuli regardless of valence.
The challenge remains to determine how such dual coding
influences feelings, like pleasure and pain, and guides goalrelated behavioral responses, like approach and avoidance.

E27
DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL RESPONSES TO FACES
PHYSICALLY SIMILAR TO THE SELF AS A FUNCTION
OF THEIR VALENCE Sara C. Verosky, Department of
Psychology and Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton
University; Alexander Todorov, Department of Psychology and
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University –
Behavioral studies show that people self-enhance across a
number of domains, including self-face recognition. We
used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
investigate whether response to physical similarity to the
self would differ depending on whether the self-face was
morphed with a positive (trustworthy) or negative
(untrustworthy) novel face. Participants were presented
with morphs of their faces (20%, 40%, 50%, 60%, and 80%
self) and asked to decide whether the morph looked like
them or the other face. Although there were no statistically
discernible effects of face valence on behavioral responses,
there were large differences in brain activation to
trustworthy and untrustworthy morphs. As similarity of the
untrustworthy morphs to the self decreased, the response in
a number of regions, including right inferior frontal gyrus,
right posterior superior temporal sulcus/ inferior parietal
lobule, and left fusiform gyrus, increased. In contrast, there
was little evidence for changes in activation as a function of
the similarity to trustworthy faces. In fact, there was a trend
in the opposite direction â€“ as the similarity with
trustworthy faces increased so did the activation. That is,
these regions seemed to differentiate between the self and
untrustworthy faces to a much greater extent than between
the self and trustworthy faces, despite the fact that the task
did not demand evaluation of the faces. The findings
suggest that comparing the self to others who are viewed as
positive versus negative triggers different psychological
processes.

E29
PUPILLARY RESPONSES TO IMAGES WITH SOCIALAFFECTIVE CONTENT IN AUTISM AND WILLIAMS
SYNDROME Marie-Christine Andre, Boston University School
of Medicine; Olufemi Olu-Lafe, Boston University; Daniela PlesaSkwerer, Boston University School of Medicine; Helen TagerFlusberg, Boston University School of Medicine – Initially
viewed as diametric opposites in their social phenotypes,
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) and Williams Syndrome
(WS) reveal subtle commonalities in social deficits. Indeed,
recent work has found impairments in social cognition and
perception on explicit tasks in both populations. We
examined implicit processing of emotional information as
reflected in psychophysiological responses to socialaffective visual content. Pupillary responses were used as a
measure of arousal to threat-related images from the
International Affective Picture System (IAPS) selected based
on their content â€“ social, non-social and angry or fearful
faces. Individuals with ASD matched on age with
individuals with WS and normal controls (NCs) passively
viewed emotionally charged pictures while pupil diameter
measures were collected using a TOBII-1750 eye-tracker.
The results revealed a significant group-by-content
interaction with all three groups exhibiting a different
pattern of responsiveness. Most strikingly, the ASD group
showed greater pupil dilation to faces than the WS group.
Larger pupillary changes were similarly found in the ASD
group when viewing faces compared to images with nonsocial and social content. No difference in content-related
responsiveness was found within the WS group. The NCs
exhibited greater pupil dilation for non-social than social

E28
NEURAL ACTIVATION IN THE ‘REWARD CIRCUIT’
SHOWS A NONLINEAR RESPONSE TO FACIAL
ATTRACTIVENESS Xiaoyun Liang, Brandeis University;
Leslie Zebrowitz, Brandeis University; Eyleen Zhang, Brandeis
University – Positive behavioral responses to attractive faces
have led neuroscientists to investigate underlying neural
mechanisms in a ‘reward circuit’ that includes brain regions
innervated by dopamine pathways. Using male faces
ranging from attractive to extremely unattractive, disfigured
ones, this study is the first to demonstrate heightened
responses to both rewarding and aversive faces in

20

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour; Robbert J.
Verkes, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Pompestichting Nijmegen – For successful goal-directed
behavior it is essential for humans to continuously monitor
one’s actions and detect errors as fast as possible. EEG
studies have identified an error-related ERP component
known as the error-related negativity (ERN), originating
from posterior medial frontal cortex. Recently, an ERN has
also been demonstrated following the observation of other’s
errors, the so-called observed ERN (oERN). Individuals
with psychopathy are characterized by a failure to
efficiently adapt their behavior in response to aversive
events, suggesting deficits in error-monitoring processes.
Crucially however, the core symptoms of psychopathy are
most prominent during interactions with other people. The
aim of the current study was to disentangle possible deficits
in monitoring of own and other’s errors in individuals with
psychopathy. Behavioral and EEG data were obtained from
18 individuals with psychopathy and 18 healthy controls
matched for age and education. All participants performed
a speeded choice-reaction task and observed another person
perform the same task. The two groups did not differ in
ERN amplitudes following own errors, but the individuals
with psychopathy did display reduced oERN amplitudes in
response to other’s errors. In line with previous studies from
our lab, individuals with psychopathy do not show
disturbances in the automatic processing of own errors.
Importantly, however, the current study demonstrates
specific deficits in the monitoring of other’s actions. The
present findings are in line with the prominent disturbed
interpersonal behavior characteristic for this severe
personality disorder and may thus provide us with
important knowledge about the underlying cognitive and
neural mechanisms.

content. These pupillometry results are consistent with
previous findings of increased autonomic arousal measured
by skin conductance responses in people with ASD and
electrodermal hypoarousal in WS to viewing emotional
faces. The ASD group’s hyperarousal to face content
parallels previous findings of amygdala hyperactivation to
direct gaze in ASD. Possible explanations for these profiles
of autonomic responsiveness will be discussed.
E30
INTENTION RECOGNITION IN AUTISM: AN FMRI
STUDY Angela Ciaramidaro, Department of Psychology, Center
for Cognitive Science, University of Turin, Italy; Sven Bolte,
Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, J. W. GoetheUniversity, Frankfurt/M., Germany; Sabine Schlitt, Department
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, J. W. Goethe-University,
Frankfurt/M., Germany; Bruno G. Bara, Center for Cognitive
Science, University of Turin, Italy; Bernhard Weber, Department
of Psychiatry, J. W. Goethe-University, Frankfurt/M., Germany;
Fritz Poustka, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, J.
W. Goethe-University, Frankfurt/M., Germany; Henrik Walter,
Department of Psychiatry, Division of Medical Psychology,
University of Bonn, Germany – Aim of the study: Theory of
Mind (ToM) is the ability to explain and predict the
behaviour of conspecifics, based on observation of their
intentional actions. This ability seems to be impaired in
patients with autism. Studies on brain function show
atypical patters of brain activation in individuals with
autism when processing ToM task, but no studies have
distinguished between different types of intentions
involved. Using a paradigm including a control condition
(physical causation or Ph-C) and two intention conditions
(private intention or PInt and communicative intentions or
CInt) we investigated intention recognition in autism.
Method: 18 right-handed patients (3 female; age 20.4) and 18
controls subject (3 female; age 19.3) were recruited. The
participants’ task was to choose the logical ending of a series
of comic-strips. fMRI-imaging: 3 Tesla Scanner (Allegra,
Siemens, Erlangen, Germany), single-shot EPI-sequence,
TE/TR 30/2000 ms, 30 slices. Image processing and data
analysis: SPM5. Results: ANOVA between groups
comparing contrasts of interest in controls and patients
revealed significantly elevated activations only in the
control group compared to the patient group and not vice
versa. The contrast PInt versus Ph-C reveals differences in
the inferior frontal gyrus, and the contrast CInt versus Ph-C
indicates significant group differences in the right TPJ.
Conclusion: Here we provide evidences that the dysfunction
on individuals with autism was dependent on the type of
intention represented.

E32
NEURAL CORRELATES OF FAIRNESS IN SOCIAL
DECISION-MAKING
ACROSS
CHILDHOOD,
ADOLESCENCE AND ADULTHOOD Berna Guroglu,
Leiden University; Wouter van den Bos, Leiden University; Serge
Rombouts, Leiden University Medical Center; Eveline Crone,
Leiden University – The concerns for self versus others
change across child and adolescent development but the
neural mechanisms of these developmental changes are
currently unknown. The Ultimatum Game (UG), in which a
responder can accept or reject an offer made by a proposer,
is a well-established tool to study fairness concerns. In this
study we have used an adapted version of the UG that is
better suited for examining fairness and intentionality
considerations in social exchanges (Falk, Fair, &
Fischbacher, 2003). Prior neuroimaging studies based on the
UG in adults have demonstrated that the insula is activate
when unfair offers are rejected, whereas the lateral
prefrontal cortex (lat-PFC) is activated when unfair offers
are accepted and the tendency to reject unfair offers is
overridden (Sanfey et al., 2003). We tested how these brain
areas are sensitive to self-other concerns between ages 9 and
25 (current n = 51). As predicted, neural correlates of

E31
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE DETECTION OF OWN
AND OTHER’S ERRORS IN INDIVIDUALS WITH
PSYCHOPATHY Ellen R.A. de Bruijn, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour; Inti A. Brazil, Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Pompestichting Nijmegen;
Berend H. Bulten, Pompestichting Nijmegen; Jan K. Buitelaar,

21

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

Ur, Department of Psychology, University of Haifa, and Pediatric
Rehabilitation Department, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Israel;
Rachel Tomer, Department of Psychology, University of Haifa,
Israel; Amichai Brezner, Pediatric Rehabilitation Department,
Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Israel; Jana Landa, Pediatric
Rehabilitation Department, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Israel;
Simone Shamay-Tsoory, Department of Psychology, University of
Haifa, Israel – Children with brain lesions, especially those
involving the frontal lobes, often exhibit difficulties in social
cognition and behavior. These have been attributed in part
to deficits in Theory of Mind (ToM) and executive functions
(EF). Previous adult lesion studies have differentiated
between affective and cognitive ToM, referring to reasoning
about mental states involving emotions or not involving
them, respectively. The goal of this study was to examine
the relationship between early frontal lobe lesions and
affective versus cognitive ToM. Children with brain lesions
aged 6- 13 years (n=12), and age- and verbal abilitymatched healthy controls (n=90), completed comparable
versions of cognitive and affective ToM tasks (false belief,
false attribution, sarcasm, and deception stories), as well as
several EF tasks. We hypothesized that the integration
between ToM and affective understanding (“belief about
emotion”) is related to maturation of frontal lobe regions
and circuits more so than cognitive ToM (“belief about
belief”). As predicted, children with lesions involving the
frontal lobes were impaired in understanding affective but
not cognitive ToM stories, when compared to healthy
controls. However, children with posterior lesions were not
significantly different from controls on any of these
measures. Children with frontal lesions additionally
performed less well on tasks assessing visual working
memory and reversal learning. Conclusions: The study
emphasizes that early frontal lobe damage may lead to
deficits in affective ToM and EF, processes which contribute
to social cognition and behavioral regulation. These deficits
may account for the social and behavioral difficulties
commonly found among this population.

fairness considerations were intention-dependent. Violation
of own social norms (i.e., acceptance of unfair offer with fair
or hyperfair alternatives or rejection of unfair offer with no
alternative) was related to higher ACC and insula activity.
Importantly, the modulating role of dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) changed with age; specifically, in young
children DLPFC was active when accepting unfair offers,
whereas in adults DLPFC was active when rejecting unfair
offers. We suggest that these data indicate a shift in
implementation of control, possibly related to the
development of perspective-taking skills and understanding
of intentionality with age (Blakemore et al., 2007).
E33
ATYPICAL NEURAL SELF-REPRESENTATION IN
AUTISM Michael V. Lombardo, University of Cambridge;
Bhismadev Chakrabarti, University of Reading; Ed Bullmore,
University of Cambridge; Susan Sadek, University of Cambridge;
Greg Pasco, University of Cambridge; Sally Wheelwright,
University of Cambridge; John Suckling, University of
Cambridge; Simon Baron-Cohen, University of Cambridge; MRC
AIMS Consortium, University of Cambridge, University of
Oxford, Institute of Psychiatry Kings College London – The
autistic ‘self’ is a paradox. On the one hand, individuals
with autism are thought to be totally self-focused, yet are
also impaired in self-referential cognition. The organization
of neural representations of self and other may be an
important component in understanding this paradox and its
relation to the social impairments in autism. We examined
the neural circuitry involved in self-representations in
autism spectrum conditions (ASC). Thirty three adult males
with Asperger Syndrome and 33 age-, IQ-, and sex matched
neurotypical adults were scanned during fMRI while
making reflective mentalizing or physical judgments about
themselves or a familiar non-close other (the British Queen).
While neurotypical adults recruited ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vMPFC) more for self than other, individuals with
ASC recruited vMPFC similarly for self and other. This
absent self-other distinction in the vMPFC of individuals
with ASC also correlated with individual differences in
social impairment on the Autism Diagnostic InterviewRevised (ADI-R).
As social impairment increased,
Self>Other processing in vMPFC decreased into an atypical
pattern of vMPFC recruitment for Other>Self. The typical
pattern of increased self-specific functional connectivity
between vMPFC, frontal operculum, and somatosensory
was also absent in ASC. These results illustrate a systemwide dysfunction of the normative neural circuits engaged
during self-representation in ASC. The equivalent vMPFC
response to self and other is highly indicative of an extreme
egocentric stance in ASC. This egocentric stance may derail
typical development of the self and its relation to the social
world and may be a key component underlying social
impairments in autism.

E35
AMYGDALA MEDIATES EXPECTANCY EFFECTS ON
PAIN-PROCESSING REGIONS Lauren Y. Atlas, Columbia
University; Niall Bolger, Columbia University; Martin A.
Lindquist, Columbia University; Tor D. Wager, Columbia
University - Numerous affective domains have been shown
to be highly influenced by expectancy, yet we know little
about the specific mechanisms by which expectations
modulate affective experience. Expectations about pain
intensity can strongly influence self-reported pain in
experimental and clinical settings, but whether and how
expectancy-related changes in the brain contribute to the
subjective experience of pain is largely unknown. In
addition, limbic and striatal regions such as the amygdala
and ventral striatum are implicated in hundreds of studies
of emotion and affect, but they have an ambiguous
relationship with pain. In this study, we provide evidence
that pain expectancies influence both core pain-processing
regions and interconnected limbic regions, including the

E34
IMPAIRED AFFECTIVE THEORY OF MIND AMONG
CHILDREN WITH FRONTAL LOBE INJURIES Tal Shany-

22

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

amygdala. We used a novel multi-level mediation analysis
in fMRI to identify regions that 1) respond to expectancy, 2)
predict trial-to-trial variations in pain reports, and 3)
formally mediate the relationship between experimentally
manipulated expectancy and reported pain. Several
canonical pain-processing regions emerged as mediators,
including anterior cingulate cortex, anterior insula,
thalamus, and pons. In addition to these pain-processing
mediators, we identified mediators not typically associated
with pain but with affective value including the left
amygdala. In this presentation, we focus on interactions
between expectancy effects on left dorsal amygdala and
pain-processing mediators. We show that expectancyrelated increases in the amgydala predict increases in core
pain-processing regions, which in turn predict pain
experience. These results directly link amygdala activity to
perceived pain, and begin to outline how multiple brain
pathways interact to generate the subjective experience of
pain.

attachment system and exacerbating a pre-existing, mixedmotives interpersonal conflict (affiliate/ingratiate but
protect self/punish others), and undermining rational
behavior.
E37
SEX AND STRESS: NEURAL ACTIVATION CHANGES
DURING PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS Annie Duchesne,
Douglas Mental Health Institute, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada; Najmeh Kahili Mahani, Douglas Mental Health
Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Claudia
Buss, Douglas Mental Health Institute, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Katarina Dedovic, Douglas Mental
Health Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
Jens C Pruessner, Douglas Mental Health Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada – Introduction: Within
Health research, one of the best-replicated and most
consistent findings is the difference in vulnerability between
men and women to fall ill from stress-related diseases. Sex
differences in stress reactivity are consistently shown in
human and animal studies, although little is known about
the neural mechanisms mediating these effects. The goal of
this project was to assess gender differences of endocrine
and neural activation changes during a psychosocial stress
paradigm. Methods: We exposed 26 women and 25 men to a
functional magnetic resonance imaging stress task
(Montreal Imaging Stress Task; MIST) consisting of
challenging mental arithmetic with a predetermined failure
rate and negative feedback. Salivary cortisol was measured
along the procedure. Results: As a whole, men showed a
significant cortisol increase in response to the paradigm,
while women did not. Looking specifically at responders
and non responders, we demonstrated that during stress
neural activity of men responders includes deactivation of
the orbitofrontal cortex and hippocampus while women
responders did not showed hippocampal deactivation. In
the non responders only women present a deactivation of
the cuneus, precuneus and sensory cortex. Conclusion: Our
endocrines and neural activation results support important
sexual differences with respect to stress reactivity to a
challenging mental arithmetic. Recently, several studies
have demonstrated that achievement-type tasks are not the
best stressors for women which might explain the observed
sex difference. Exploration of the neural activation in
varying stressful contexts would represent an interesting
approach to better understand the gender differences in
stress reactivity.

E36
OXYTOCIN PRODUCES DIVERGENT EFFECTS ON
TRUST AND COOPERATION IN HEALTHY ADULTS
AND ADULTS WITH BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
DISORDER Jennifer A. Bartz, Mount Sinai School of Medicine;
Daphne Simeon, Mount Sinai School of Medicine; Holly K.
Hamilton, Mount Sinai School of Medicine; Sarah I. Crystal,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine; Victor Vicens, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine; Eric Hollander, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine – Oxytocin (OXT) is involved in pro-social
behavior in animals and trust in humans. Moreover,
negative early care-giving experiences impact the OXT
system, both in animals and humans. Borderline personality
disorder (BPD) is characterized by interpersonal instability,
impulsivity, and trust issues, and is often associated with
early trauma. We investigated whether OXT would facilitate
trust and cooperation in individuals with BPD and healthy
controls. Thirteen healthy and 14 BPD participants were
randomly administered 40IU of intranasal OXT or placebo
and then played the Assurances Game, a social dilemma
game involving salient trust issues, with a partner
(confederate). Controls expected their partner to be more
cooperative, whereas BPD participants expected their
partner to be less cooperative following OXT, F(1,23)=4.31,
p<.05. Controls were more likely to cooperate in response to
their partner’s hypothetical cooperation following OXT,
whereas BPD participants were more likely to defect (an
aggressive strategy which punished their partner but cost
them monetarily), F(1,23)=4.82, p<.05. All participants
cooperated when interacting with a cooperative partner;
however, after experiencing partner defection, controls were
equally likely to cooperate or defect, whereas all BPD
participants cooperated in the OXT condition, Pearson ChiSquare = 4.2, p<.05 (a strategy which signaled trust but
again cost them monetarily). OXT produces divergent
effects on trust and cooperation in healthy and BPD
participants. The oxytocinergic system may be dysregulated
in BPD, and exogenous OXT may be activating the

E38
INTRANASAL ADMINISTRATION OF OXYTOCIN
INCREASES
ENVY
AND
SCHADENFREUDE
(GLOATING) Dvash J., University of Haifa; Shamay-Tsoory S.
G., University of Haifa; Fischer M., University of Haifa; Harari
H., Shalvata Mental Health Center; Perach-Bloom N, University
of Haifa; Levkovitz Y., Shalvata Mental Health Center –
Background: Humans have an exceptional social tendency
to compare themselves to others -- we feel envious when we
receive less valuable rewards and may rejoice when our

23

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

pay-offs are more advantageous. Envy and schadenfreude
(gloating over the other's misfortune) are social emotions,
widely agreed to be a symptom of the human social
tendency to compare one's pay-offs with those of others.
Given the important social components of envy and
schadenfreude, we speculated that oxytocin may have a
modulating effect on the intensity of these emotions.
Methods: Participants played a game of chance involving
monetary gains with another player following the
administration of oxytocin and placebo. Results: Oxytocin,
compared with placebo, had the remarkable effect of
increasing envy ratings during unequal monetary gains
conditions involving relative loss (when the participant
gained less money than another player). Oxytocin also
increased ratings of schadenfreude during relative gain
conditions. On the other hand, oxytocin had no effect on
emotional ratings following equal monetary gains, nor did it
affect general mood ratings. Conclusions: These results
suggest that the oxytocinergic system is involved in
modulating envy and schadenfreude. Rather than being
involved solely in positive prosocial behaviors (as believed
so far), this system probably plays a key role in a wider
range of social emotion-related behaviors. Since the
oxytocinergic system has recently been positioned amongst
the most promising targets for various psychiatric
treatments, we suggest that it is essential to also inventory
potential undesirable effects of such treatments.

oxytocin in fear recognition, which could be relevant for
clinical disorders that manifest deficits in recognizing
emotional facial expressions, particularly fear.
E40
WORKER ALLOSTATIC LOAD EFFECTS ON DIURNAL
AND REACTIVE STRESS MEASURES Robert-Paul Juster,
Andrea Perna, Alireza Hashemi, Shireen Sindi, Marie-France
Marin, & Sonia Lupien, Laboratory of Psychoneuroendocrinology
of the Centre for Studies on Human Stress, Fernand-Seguin
Research Centre of the Louis-H Lafontaine Hospital – The
allostatic load (AL) model proposes that chronic stress
contributes to physiological ‘wear and tear’ as dysregulated
stress hormone levels like cortisol (C) exact deleterious
effects on multiple biological systems and increase
vulnerabilities to stress-related diseases like depression. We
investigated the effect of AL indices on diurnal C
fluctuations and stress reactivity measures induced using
the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST). Thirty full-time Montreal
general workers ages 27 to 65 participated. Blood samples
were assayed for C, dehydroepiandrosterone-sulphate, creactive
protein,
fibrinogen,
insulin,
glycosylated
haemoglobin, albumin, creatinine, amylase, triglycerides,
total and HDL-cholesterol. Participant’s waist-to-hip ratio,
systolic and diastolic blood pressures were also recorded.
Biomarker levels within high-risk quartiles based upon
biomedical normative ranges were aggregated into an AL
index subsequently categorized into high and low
groupings. Diurnal C for two days measured upon
awakening, 30 minutes afterwards, 2:00PM, 4:00PM and
before bedtime were collected. Stress reactivity was assessed
using 10 repeated measures of salivary C, alpha-amylase,
recordings of blood pressure and heart rate throughout the
TSST protocol involving public speech and mental
arithmetic tasks. The Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) was
also administered. Repeated measures ANOVAs were
employed to assess AL group effects on stress reactivity
with MBI scores entered as a covariate. High AL was related
to significantly lower diurnal and reactive C levels but
higher blood pressure and heart rate throughout the TSST.
Consistent with AL expectations, the observed sluggishness
of C activations and simultaneous elevations in
cardiovascular reactivity resembles burnout profiles
characterized by blunted C and elevated catecholamine
levels.

E39
THE EFFECT OF INTRANASAL ADMINISTRATION OF
OXYTOCIN ON FEAR RECOGNITION Fischer Meytal,
Department of Psychology, University of Haifa; Shamay-Tsoory
Simone G., Department of Psychology, University of Haifa;
Harari Hagai, Shalvata Mental Health Care Center; Levkovitz
Yechiel, Shalvata Mental Health Care Center – The
oxytocinergic system has been associated with prosocial
behavior. Recent studies suggest that administration of
oxytocin may improve empathy and increase trust. Given its
modulatory effect on amygdala activation, we speculated
that the administration of oxytocin may have a selective
effect on fear recognition. In the present study, a doubleblind placebo-controlled crossover design was used in a
dynamic facial expression task, in order to assess the effect
of oxytocin on fear processing. A single dose of oxytocin or
a placebo was administered intranasally to 27 healthy male
subjects 45 minutes prior to task performance. Following
treatment the participants watched a neutral human face
changing its expression into an emotional one (happy, sad,
fearful, angry, surprised or disgusted). The results showed
that a single intranasal administration of oxytocin, as
opposed to the placebo, improved subjects’ ability to
recognize fear (F(1,24)=7.16 p<0.05), but not that of sadness,
happiness, surprise, disgust or anger. These results are in
line with other studies that relate oxytocin the modulation
of neural circuitry for social cognition and fear in humans
(Kirsch et al. 2005). The results support our initial
hypothesis regarding the role of oxytocin in the ability to
perceive and use social cues and suggest a specific role for

E41
REGULATION OF CRAVING USING COGNITIVE
STRATEGIES: LESSONS FROM SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Hedy Kober, Columbia University, Department of Psychology;
Ethan F. Kross, Universty of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Department
of Psychology; Peter Mende-Sidlecki, Columbia University,
Department of Psychology;
Walter Mischel, Columbia
University, Department of Psychology; Carl Hart, Columbia
University, Department of Psychology, Division on of Substance
Abuse, New York State Psychiatric Institute and Department of
Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia
University; Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia University, Department

24

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

of Psychology – A failure to regulate craving has been
implicated in substance abuse disorders and in posttreatment relapse. This underscores the urgent need to
understand the neural correlates of craving and its
regulation in substance abusing populations. This talk will
present data from a recent study that used functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the neural
bases of craving for cigarettes and food, as well as the
regulation of craving using cognitive strategies in a nicotinedependent population. Twenty-one cigarette smokers
viewed images of cigarettes and of delicious looking,
unhealthy foods, and were instructed to think about either
the (a) immediate sensory experience (e.g. increase craving),
or (b) the long-term negative physical health implications
associated with consuming each item (e.g. regulate craving).
As expected, subjective ratings indicated that participants
experienced significantly less craving for both cigarettes and
food when considering the long-term consequences
associated with consumption, suggesting that cognitive
strategies can be used to effectively regulate craving for
both food and cigarettes (consistent with clinical data). On
“increase craving” compared to “regulate craving” trials, we
observed activation in regions including subgenual
cingulate, ventral striatum, and ventral tegmental area. This
pattern was stronger for cigarettes compared to food,
consistent with participants’ reports of greater craving for
cigarettes compared to food. Conversely, on “regulate
craving” trials we observed activity in “control” regions
including the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and inferior
frontal gyrus. This pattern was stronger for food compared
to cigarettes, suggesting a possible mechanism for the
impaired regulation of cigarette craving (compared to food
craving) exhibited by these cigarette smokers in everyday
life. Ongoing work on the regulation of craving in
methamphetamine-dependent individuals will also be
discussed.

visual analogue scale (VAS) in two separate runs. In a
double-blind, between-subject design, participants were
administered either 0.2 mg/kg naloxone intravenously
(n=10) or placebo (n=9) 5 minutes prior to the judgmenttask. The magnitude of the VAS score and the response
latencies were measured. In addition, mood ratings were
assessed before and after substance administration. VAS
score analyses revealed a significant interaction between
substance group and run; the magnitude of similarity
judgments was lower in the naloxone than in the placebo
group. No substance group difference was found in the
dissimilarity run. Reaction latencies and mood scores did
not differ between the two groups, indicating that the
reported effects are unlikely to simply reflect altered motor
performance and motivation. We thus infer that naloxone
decreased the “analogy criterion” in visual cognitiveaffective judgments, but only when framed for similarity
but not for dissimilarity. These findings indicate a
modulatory effect of naloxone on cognitive judgments. The
task introduced here could be used for the implicit study
and quantification of subtle affective-cognitive processes
beyond the level of merely questionnaire data.
E43
ABNORMAL BRAIN RESPONSES DURING SOCIAL
INCLUSION IN DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS Poornima Kumar,
University of Aberdeen & Oxford, Gordon Waiter, Trevor
Ahearn, Maarten Milders, Ian Reid, University of Aberdeen, J
Douglas Steele, University of Aberdeen & Dundee – Humans
desire to be included within a group and feel frustrated if
they are excluded. Learning to predict about social
outcomes facilitates humans to adapt socially and live a
healthy and longer life. Patients with depressive illness
often respond abnormally to social and emotional stimuli
and appear impaired in their prediction of social behaviour.
The subgenual cingulate, posterior cingulate and
orbitofrontal cortices, and insula have been reported to be
involved in various social cognitive and emotion tasks in
healthy controls. These are the same regions reported to be
structurally and functionally abnormal in depressed
patients. Hence, we hypothesised that these regions would
be abnormal in depressed individuals when undertaking a
social inclusion experiment. 15 patients with major
depressive disorder and 16 matched healthy controls were
engaged in a social inclusion paradigm during fMRI
(functional magnetic resonance imaging) scanning. The
paradigm required participants to play a “ball passing”
video game while in the scanner. During the image
acquisition the participants would be periodically excluded
from the game. The task was used to investigate the neural
circuitry involved during various levels of inclusion in
healthy controls and depressed patients. Consistent with
our hypothesis, the subgenual cingulate, lateral
orbitofrontal cortex, insula and posterior cingulate were
found to be deactivated in depressed patients when
compared with controls during social inclusion. Abnormal
activity in these brain regions in patients during a social
inclusion task may be associated with a failure to efficiently

E42
NALOXONE MODULATES VISUAL JUDGMENTS OF
SIMILARITY BUT NOT DISSIMILARITY Peter
Krummenacher, Collegium Helveticum, Zurich, Switzerland,
Department of Neurology, Neuropsychology Unit, University
Hospital Zurich, Switzerland; Elvan Kut, Collegium Helveticum,
Zurich, Switzerland; Marianne Regard, Department of
Neurology, Neuropsychology Unit, University Hospital Zurich,
Switzerland; Gerd Folkers, Collegium Helveticum, Zurich,
Switzerland; Peter Brugger, Department of Neurology,
Neuropsychology Unit, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland
– Endogenous opioids have been implicated in mediating
(placebo) analgesia and in the regulation of social emotions
such as attachment. However, little is known about its
putative contribution to higher cognitive functions. To
investigate links between endogenous opioids and
cognition, we used a novel visual similarity/dissimilarity
judgment-task with meaningless geometric figures.
Eighteen different stimulus pairs were tachistoscopically
(150ms) presented and 19 healthy right-handed men had to
judge the similarities and the dissimilarities on a bipolar

25

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

predict social behavior and respond normally during social
interactions.

prefrontal cortex when it was subjectively identified as the
self relative to when identified as a friend. ERPs that
differentiated the morphed face identified as the self or
friend occurred at 640 ms over the right frontal electrodes.
Our fMRI and ERP results provide neuroimaging evidence
for the dissociation between externally induced selfawareness and internally generated self-awareness in both
neural structures involved and temporal courses of the
neural activity. Moreover, the activity in the posterior
cingulate/precuneus positively correlated with the
percentage of subjective report of the morphed face as the
self, suggesting a functional role of this brain area in
orienting consciousness to the self.

E44
SELECTIVE ATTENTION TO SMOKING CUES IN
SMOKERS AND NON-SMOKERS: AN ERP STUDY
USING THE VISUAL ODDBALL PARADIGM Littel, M.
Institute of Psychology, Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Franken, I.H.A. Institute of
Psychology, Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands – Substance use disorders are characterized by
cognitive processing biases, such as automatically detecting
and orienting attention towards drug-related stimuli. Up to
now it is unclear how, when and what kind of attention (i.e.
bottom-up, top-down) interacts with the processing of these
stimuli. In addition, it is unclear whether smokers are
hypersensitive to emotionally significant cues in general or
to smoking-related cues in particular. The present ERP
study aimed to enhance insight in drug-related processing
biases by manipulating attention for smoking and other
motivationally relevant (emotional) cues in smokers and
non-smokers using a visual oddball task. Each of the
categories served as a target (explicit attention; counting) or
a non-target (implicit attention; oddball) category.
Compared to non-smokers, smokers’ P300 (350-600 ms) was
enhanced to smoking pictures under both attentional
conditions. P300 amplitude did not differ between groups in
response to positive, negative, and neutral cues. It can be
concluded from this study that attention manipulation
affects the P300 differently in smokers and non-smokers.
Smokers display a very specific bias to smoking-related
cues, and this bias is present in both explicit and implicit
processing. Overall, it can be concluded that attention
appears to play an important role in drug-related processing
bias.

E46
RECONSOLIDATION OF EMOTIONAL MEMORIES IN
HUMANS: THE ROLE OF STRESS HORMONES MarieFrance Marin, Centre for Studies on Human Stress, Mental
Health Research Centre Fernand-Seguin, Hospital Louis-H.
Lafontaine, Universite de Montreal; Sonia J. Lupien, Centre for
Studies on Human Stress, Mental Health Research Centre
Fernand-Seguin, Hospital Louis-H. Lafontaine, Universite de
Montreal – Glucocorticoids (GCs) are a major class of stress
hormones known to modulate different memory processes.
In general, high levels of GCs enhance consolidation
whereas both low and high levels impair memory retrieval.
It has recently been proposed that when a memory is
retrieved, it becomes active once again and subject to
modifications before it undergoes a second round of
consolidation, called reconsolidation. The role of GCs on
memory reconsolidation in humans has not yet been
assessed. In Study 1, we therefore investigated whether a
stress induced GC elevation might impact the
reconsolidation of a reactivated memory trace. Thirty-two
participants encoded a movie containing neutral and
emotional slides. Two days later, they recalled the movie.
Then, half were exposed to a psychosocial stressor whereas
the others read magazines (controls). Memory was reassessed immediately after stress and five days later. The
stressed group recalled more emotional material after the
stressor and the effect was maintained five days later. In
Study 2, we investigated whether low levels of GCs would
affect memory retrieval in a temporary or a long-lasting
manner, which would suggest a reconsolidation effect.
Twenty-two participants encoded the movie. Three days
later, they were randomly assigned to a metyrapone (an
inhibitor of GC synthesis) or a placebo condition. Memory
performance was assessed after drug administration and
four days later. At both time points, the metyrapone group
recalled less emotional material compared to controls. These
experiments suggest that GC levels can modulate the
reactivation and the reconsolidation of emotional memories.

E45
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EXTERNALLY INDUCED
AND INTERNALLY GENERATED SELF-AWARENESS
Yina Ma, Department of Psychology, Peking University, Beijing,
P. R. China; Shihui Han Department of Psychology, Peking
University, Beijing, P. R. China – Orientation of consciousness
towards the self can either be initiated by perceived stimuli
with self-specific information or take place without stimuli
with self-specific information. However, it remains
unknown whether self-awareness in these two conditions
are associated with distinct neural correlates. To investigate
this, we presented subjects with pictures of their own face, a
face of a gender-matched friend, and an ambiguous face
morphed with self- and friend-faces. Neural activity
associated with a face identification task was recorded using
functional MRI and event-related potentials (ERPs). We
found that, relative to friend-face, self-face induced
increased activation in the caudal cingulate and decreased
amplitudes of an ERP component peaking at about 170 ms
over the occipito-temporal electrodes. However, the
morphed face generated increased activations in the
posterior cingulate/precuneus and the ventral medial

E47
BRAIN RESPONSES ASSOCIATED WITH REWARD
SENSITIVITY AND ADHERENCE TO A 9-MONTH
EXERCISE PROGRAM Laura E. Martin, University of Kansas
Medical Center; Rebecca J. Chambers, University of Kansas

26

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

Medical Center; Christie Befort, University of Kansas Medical
Center; Jeffrey J. Honas, University of Kansas; Richard R.
Suminiski, Kansas City University of Medicine and Biosciences;
Wendell C. Taylor, University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston; Joseph E. Donnelly, University of Kansas; Cary R.
Savage, University of Kansas Medical Center – Regular exercise
is associated with numerous health benefits; however, the
rewarding aspects of exercise are not immediate.
Individuals must, therefore, make behavioral choices based
on anticipation of future reward. Differences in reward
sensitivity may, therefore, be associated with adherence to
an exercise program. The current study employed fMRI to
examine the neural systems of reward while monetary
rewards were predicted and delivered among participants
enrolled in a 9-month exercise program. The fMRI task
consisted of the presentation of cues that predicted the
delivery of a reward or punishment with 75% probability.
Participants received feedback on how much money they
won or lost on each trial. To date, we have data in 5
adherers (participants who completed the 9 month
program) and 5 non-adherers (participants who dropped
out). Preliminary results indicate differences between
reward and punishment in the middle frontal gyrus of the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) at both anticipation and delivery.
During anticipation, adherers showed greater activation
(reward>punishment) than non-adherers in PFC (x,y,z =
30,23,40). During delivery, non-adherers showed greater
activation (reward>punishment) than adherers in PFC (x,y,z
= 24,5,43) when expected outcomes were delivered. When
unexpected outcomes were delivered, PFC responded more
to punishments compared to rewards among non-adherers.
These preliminary results indicate that adherence to an
exercise program may be influenced by individual
differences in how rewards and punishments are processed.
More specifically, individuals who show increased PFC
activations during reward anticipation may be more
successful in long-term exercise programs than individuals
who show increased activations only during delivery.

reappraisal, which has been shown to decrease self-reported
negative affect and BOLD signal from the amygdala.
Twenty-four women were scanned on a 3-Tesla GE magnet
while viewing top-down and bottom-up emotional stimuli
under instructions to look and respond naturally, or to use
cognitive reappraisal to decrease negative affect. Measures
of self-reported negative affect indicated that top-down
emotions were more successfully regulated than bottom-up
emotions. BOLD signal from the amygdala showed also
showed this interaction, but paradoxically, amygdala
activation was greater during regulation of bottom-up
stimuli than during the instruction to respond naturally.
This implies that the method of emotion generation (topdown vs. bottom-up) may impact the subsequent success of
top-down regulation strategies like cognitive reappraisal.
These results have implications for developing more
effective emotion regulation techniques depending on the
emotion generation processes.
E49
PERCEIVED SOCIAL STATUS MODULATES THE
NEURAL RESPONSE TO VIEWING EMOTIONAL
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AMONG ADOLESCENTS Keely
A. Muscatell, University of California, Los Angeles; Baldwin M.
Way, University of California, Los Angeles; Mirella Dapretto,
University of California, Los Angeles – Recent research has
demonstrated that subjective perceptions of low social
status are related to a number of negative outcomes,
including increased risk of mortality, and greater
physiological stress reactivity following a socially
threatening event. Recent research has begun to explore
potential neural mechanisms of these effects. In particular, it
was recently demonstrated that young adults perceptions’
of their parents’ social status was associated with amygdala
activity when viewing threatening facial expressions. In the
present study, we sought to determine if a similar effect
occurred in adolescents. Specifically, we predicted that
adolescents’ perceptions of their family’s social status would
modulate the neural response to viewing threatening facial
expressions. To test this prediction, 27 adolescents (age 13
years) completed a revised version of the MacArthur
Subjective Social Status Scale, in which they were asked to
indicate where their family stood on a ladder intended to
represent the hierarchy in American society. Participants
also underwent an fMRI scan while they observed faces that
displayed fear, anger, and sad expressions. Results revealed
that adolescents who rated their families as lower in social
status exhibited greater neural activity in the dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex and anterior insula, regions involved in
processing physical and social pain. Thus, as has been
found with adult samples, low familial social status is
associated with increased neural sensitivity to social threat
in adolescents.

E48
TOP-DOWN
AND
BOTTOM-UP
EMOTIONAL
PROCESSING:
THE
INTERACTION
BETWEEN
EMOTION
GENERATION
AND
EMOTION
REGULATION Kateri McRae, Stanford University; Supriya
Misra, Stanford University; Aditya K. Prasad, Stanford
University; Sean C. Pereira Stanford University; & James J.
Gross, Stanford University; . – Current theories driving
affective neuroscience indicate that emotions may be
generated in at least two different ways: bottom-up and topdown.
Bottom-up emotion generation relies on the
properties of a stimulus itself through the perception of lowlevel stimulus features (e.g., emotional faces), while topdown emotion generation relies on the meaning given to a
stimulus through high-level cognitive appraisals (e.g.,
verbal statements). The present study tested the hypothesis
that top-down emotions are better regulated than bottomup emotions when using a top-down emotion regulation
strategy. In particular, we focused upon cognitive

E50
DOES IT MAKE A DIFFERENCE IF I LOOK AT YOU OR
YOUR PICTURE? Laura Pönkänen, University of Tampere; Jari
Hietanen, University of Tampere – Virtually all research on

27

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

face perception is currently conducted by presenting images
of faces on a computer screen. However, it is obvious that
looking at a face of a real person vs. an image on a computer
screen is experientially not the same. In a series of recent
experiments, we have measured brain responses and
autonomic responses to facial stimuli differing in their
potentiality (human face vs. dummy face) or preparedness
(direct gaze vs. averted gaze) for interaction. These stimuli
have been presented in two conditions, as pictures on a
monitor vs. live through a computer-controlled liquid
crystal window. The critical question is, whether the mode
of presentation has an effect on the (supposedly) differential
brain and autonomic responses to these facial stimuli.
Namely, in the picture condition, the potentiality or
preparedness for interaction cannot be realized. This is
possible only in the live condition. The results have shown,
for example, that visual event-related potentials
discriminated between a real human face and a dummy face
in the live condition, but not when they were presented as
pictures. Measurements of the frontal EEG asymmetry and
skin conductance responses have indicated that seeing
another person’s direct and averted gaze differently
activated the motivational approach avoidance systems.
Again, these results were observed only when the faces
were presented live. We suggest that facing a real person vs.
a picture of a face activates social-cognitive processes
differently, and this, in turn, may have an impact on sensory
and affective-motivational responses to facial stimuli.

to submissive faces. These findings were robust to task,
appearing in subjects asked to perform a one-back
recognition task, as well as in subjects asked to make a
binary approach/avoid decision. We also compare these
results to those obtained when subjects viewed a non-social
dimension matched for change in identity and distance in
physical face space.
E52
CORTISOL LEVELS IN RESPONSE TO STRESSFUL
VERSUS
NON-STRESSFUL
TESTING
ENVIRONMENTS Shireen Sindi, McGill University;
Catherine Lord, McMaster University; Bruce Pike, McGill
University; Jens Pruessner, McGill University; Sonia Lupien,
University of Montreal – Elevated cortisol levels can impair
cognitive performance, but do testing environments
themselves function as stressors? The goal of this study was
to assess whether the cortisol stress response (CSR) differs
as a function of testing environments manipulated to induce
higher or lower distress. Twenty eight adults ages 18 to 35
were each tested in three different conditions: 1) Montreal
Neurological Institute (MNI) tested on university grounds
in the afternoon by a young graduate student; 2) Douglas
Hospital (DH) tested far from the university in the morning
by an older adult; 3) Douglas Hospital re-visit (DH-R) for
exposure to a psychosocial stress task. Salivary cortisol was
repeatedly measured in all conditions. Area under the curve
with respect to ground (AUCg) was calculated for the CSR
in each session. One-way repeated measures ANOVA were
performed with three levels for the different contexts
followed by paired samples t-test for significant effects.
Results revealed that DH AUCg was significantly higher
than the MNI AUCg. DH-R AUCg was also significantly
higher than MNI AUCg. That young adults experienced
higher CSRs in both stressful conditions (morning testing)
versus the non-stressful condition (afternoon testing)
stresses the importance of context.

E51
A NEURAL TEST OF A TWO-DIMENSIONAL MODEL
OF FACE EVALUATION Christopher Said, Princeton
University; Nikolaas Oosterhof, Bangor University; Andrew
Engell, Yale University; Alexander Todorov, Princeton
University – People make rapid and reliable trait inferences
from faces. These inferences are often not independent of
each other, thus rendering many functional imaging
findings difficult to interpret. Specifically, during the
perception of faces, variance in brain response that is
attributed to one trait inference might be better explained by
a different, correlated inference. One way to avoid some of
the problems associated with correlated trait inferences is to
use orthogonal dimensions from which other traits can be
created by linear combination. Using a variant of reverse
correlation, we created a CGI (computer-generated imagery)
model
of
social
face
space
consisting
of
a
valence/trustworthiness dimension and an orthogonalized
power/dominance dimension. In fMRI studies, we found
significant linear responses to both dimensions in inferior
temporal cortex: Reponses were larger as dominance
increased and trustworthiness decreased. Quadratic
responses to trustworthiness were found in the inferior
temporal cortex, the basal ganglia, and the dorsal amygdala:
Responses were largest at the extremes of both
trustworthiness and dominance, and weakest in the middle
range. These regions also showed an interaction between
trustworthiness and dominance, with stronger linear
responses to trustworthiness for dominant faces compared

E53
WHY AND HOW DO PEOPLE DO WHAT THEY DO?
AN
FMRI
STUDY OF
MENTALIZING
AND
MECHANIZING KNOWN ACTIONS Robert P. Spunt,
University of California, Los Angeles; Emily Falk, University of
California, Los Angeles; Matthew D. Lieberman, University of
California, Los Angeles – The present study takes an action
identification theoretical approach (Vallacher & Wegner,
1987) to characterizing the neural bases of retrieving
knowledge about everyday actions. Action identification
theory assumes that action knowledge is organized
hierarchically, with higher levels referring to the
unobservable outcomes and mental states that explain why
an action is performed, and lower levels referring to the
specific motor actions and tools that describe how the action
is performed (Kozak, Marsh, & Wegner, 2006). We used
fMRI to investigate the neural bases of mentalizing and
mechanizing known actions. Participants were presented
with schematic descriptions of 20 actions (e.g., "brush their
teeth") and were asked to silently indicate why and how

28

Saturday, October 10, 4:00 PM-5:30 PM

Poster Session E

Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen, the
Netherlands, Leiden University Institute for Psychological
Research, Clinical Psychology Unit, the Netherlands; Ivan Toni,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for
Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen, the
Netherlands, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Centre for Cognition, Radboud University Nijmegen,
the Netherlands; Lennart Verhagen, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging,
Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands, Helmholtz
Institute, Experimental Psychology, University Utrecht, Utrecht,
the Netherlands; Karin Roelofs, Leiden University Institute for
Psychological Research, Clinical Psychology Unit, the
Netherlands, Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC),
the Netherlands – Testosterone plays an important role in the
regulation of social emotional behavior (Archer, 2006), but
the neural circuits supporting this hormonal influence
remain unclear. Previous work has shown that the left
ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC) plays an important
role in this regulation, as operationalized by approach and
avoidance (AA) responses to happy and angry faces
(Roelofs et al., 2009). Here, we build on that work, using
fMRI to assess how inter-individual differences in basal
testosterone alter the cerebral circuitry involved in
regulating such social emotional behavior. BOLD-sensitive
fMR images (1.5 Tesla, multi-echo GRAPPA sequence, TR =
2.14ms, 34 slices, 3.3 x 3.3 x 3.0 mm voxel size) were
acquired while twenty healthy male participants
approached or avoided photographs of happy and angry
faces by pulling or pushing a joystick towards or away from
their bodies, respectively. The subjects responded to the
emotional value of the faces. Basal testosterone levels were
measured at the beginning of the experiment. During the
task, affect-incongruent trials (i.e. approach angry faces;
avoid happy faces) evoked longer response times and
stronger left vlPFC activity than affect-congruent trials.
Crucially, the circuitry supporting the affect-congruency
effect was strongly modulated by basal testosterone levels.
High testosterone resulted in reduced affect-congruency
effects in the vlPFC, combined with increased coupling with
the amygdala during the affect-incongruent trials.
Participants with low basal testosterone showed the
opposite pattern. These results illustrate how testosterone
can modulate the balance between changes in local activity
and inter-regional connectivity in cerebral circuits
controlling social emotional behavior.

people perform these actions. Compared to identifying how,
identifying why selectively produced activity in areas
known to be involved in mental state inference, including
both dorsal and ventral aspects of medial prefrontal cortex,
posterior cingulate cortex, right temporoparietal junction,
and left temporal pole. Consistent with an embodied
cognition account of mechanizing actions, the reverse
contrast revealed increased activity in dorsal and ventral
aspects of left premotor cortex, posterior parietal cortex, and
areas of occipitotemporal cortex. These results confirm that
independent neural systems are required to mentalize and
mechanize known actions.
E54
DO POLITICS GET YOUR HORMONES GOING?
VOTERS’
TESTOSTERONE
AND
CORTISOL
RESPONSES TO THE OUTCOME OF THE 2008 UNITED
STATES PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION Steven J Stanton,
Duke University; Jacinta C Beehner, University of Michigan Ann Arbor; Ekjyot K Saini, University of Michigan - Ann Arbor;
Cynthia M Kuhn, Duke University; Kevin S LaBar, Duke
University – Dominance contests are a critical component of
determining the leadership of social hierarchies across a
wide range of species. In modern human societies, this
dominance contest often takes the form of a democratic
election. Across mammalian species, specific testosterone
and cortisol responses are uniquely linked to winning and
losing dominance competitions. However, it is unknown
whether these patterns of hormone response to winning and
losing extend beyond interpersonal competitions to the
societal context of political elections. The present study
investigated voters’ testosterone and cortisol responses to
the outcome of the 2008 United States Presidential election.
183 participants at two research sites (Michigan and North
Carolina) provided saliva samples at several time points
before and after the announcement of the winner on
Election Night. Radioimmunoassay was used to measure
cortisol and testosterone levels in participants’ saliva.
Relative to earlier in the evening, male Barack Obama voters
had stable post-outcome testosterone levels, whereas
testosterone dropped in male John McCain and Robert Barr
voters. There was no effect of candidate choice on
testosterone change in female voters. For voters of both
sexes in North Carolina, McCain and Barr voters had postoutcome cortisol increases while Obama voters had stable
post-election cortisol levels. Cortisol levels after the outcome
of the election were positively correlated with a measure of
political conservatism in North Carolina voters. Our data
suggest that voters physiologically respond to the outcome
of political elections depending on if their candidate wins or
loses as if they had participated in an interpersonal
dominance contest.
E55
BASAL TESTOSTERONE MODULATES PREFRONTALAMYGDALA EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY DURING
SOCIAL EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR Inge Volman, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for

29

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

Poster Session H

reaction to emotional faces: they were asked to choose
which of two decades the individual in the photograph was
closest to in age. The second was a test of explicit emotion
recognition: participants were asked to pick between two
emotion labels for each face. Throughout both tasks,
bimanual recordings of skin conductance were made.
Participants also underwent structural scans in a 3 Tesla
magnet. Amygdalae were then manually segmented and
volumes were measured. Results indicated that, despite a
wide range of amygdala volumes in our sample, there was
no relationship between amygdala volume and accuracy of
emotion recognition. Similarly, amygdala volume did not
predict the extent of skin response to different emotional
expressions. The confirmation that normal variation in
amygdala volume is not associated with reaction to, or
ability to identify, emotional expressions is especially
important for functional imaging studies, where structural
differences are rarely taken into account when measuring
changes in activation in the amygdalae.

H1
PARSING
SMILES:
THE
DISTINCT
NEURAL
CORRELATES EVOKED BY EMBARRASSMENT AND
DUCHENNE SMILES Antonenko, Olga, University of
California, Berkeley; Simon-Thomas, Emiliana, University of
California, Berkeley; Keltner, Dacher, University of California,
Berkeley – Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), the current study examined neural responses to
viewing two different kinds of smiles: the classic Duchenne
smile which involves activation of the orbicularis oculi
muscles surrounding the eyes, and the more modest,
submissive embarrassment smile, which involves classic
appeasement behaviors like neck displays and gaze
aversion. FMRI data were acquired from 12 healthy
volunteers as they viewed blocked sequences of Duchenne
and embarrassment smiles. While both smile conditions
activated the left fusiform facial area (FFA) and visual
centers, embarrassment smiles also engaged the posterior
temporal cortex (PTC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), and
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). In contrast, Duchenne
smiles selectively engaged the right amygdala. Unlike the
Duchenne smile, embarrassment smiles recruited areas
associated with empathy, self-focused and social inferences.
Activation of the PTC suggests that construing
embarrassment smiles involves taking the smiler’s thoughts
and feelings into consideration, i.e. employing theory of
mind (Saxe & Powell, 2006). PCC and mPFC activation
suggests empathic and emotional inference processes
(Decety & Jackson, 2004; Singer, 2006), lending credence to
proposed social appeasement functions of embarrassment
expressions (Keltner & Buswell, 1997). In summary, while
Duchenne smiles simply prompt face perception and
emotional
salience
signals,
smiles
that
signal
embarrassment, a more complex, status-related selfconscious emotion, require social appraisal, empathic and
emotional inference processes.

H3
TO ERR IS NO BIG DEAL (WHEN YOU’RE DRUNK):
ALCOHOL, NEGATIVE AFFECT REDUCTION, AND
THE
MEANING
OF
THE
ERROR-RELATED
NEGATIVITY (ERN) D. Bartholow, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO; Erika A. Henry, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO; Sarah A. Lust, University of Missouri, Columbia,
MO; J. Scott Saults, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO –
The current research tested two competing hypotheses
concerning effects of alcohol on ERN amplitude, related to
understanding cognitive and affective/motivational
influences on this component. In a recent paper,
Ridderinkhof et al. (2002, Science) reported that alcohol
consumption decreased ERN amplitude and eliminated
typical post-error adjustment in response time. Based on
these findings, they concluded, “alcohol…compromises
performance by attenuating the brain’s capacity to detect
action slips [errors].” While plausible, this conclusion
ignores several key facts: (1) the neural generator of the
ERN, the anterior cingulate cortex, is highly sensitive to
distress; (2) error commission is aversive; and (3) alcohol is
well known to reduce distress/anxiety. Here, participants
were randomly assigned to consume alcohol, a placebo, or a
control beverage prior to completing one of two cognitive
control tasks (different experiments), both of which
included “accuracy judgment” responses following each
trial, while ERPs were recorded. Alcohol reduced ERN
amplitude and impaired post-error adjustment behavior,
but did not impair error detection. Rather, effects of alcohol
on both the ERN and post-error adjustment were related to
reductions in negative affect (indicated by self-report state
affect measures) following alcohol relative to placebo
consumption. Also, ERN amplitude was larger for placebo
than for control subjects, suggesting potential motivational
influences on placebo group performance. These findings
have two main implications: (1) alcohol impairs error
processing due to affective/motivational factors, not
compromised error detection; and (2) theories of ERN

H2
AMYGDALA
VOLUME
IN
THE
HEALTHY
POPULATION AND REACTION TO EMOTIONAL
FACES Sarah Jane Banks, Montreal Neurological Institute and
McGill University; Danielle Douglas, Concordia University;
Marilyn Jones-Gotman, Montreal Neurological Institute and
McGill University – In various neurological and psychiatric
disorders, deficits in emotion recognition are associated
with abnormalities in amygdala volume. There is also
considerable natural variation in amygdala volume in the
healthy population. This study assessed the relationship
between amygdala volume and emotion recognition ability,
as well as skin conductance responses to emotional stimuli.
Nine healthy participants with no history of neurologic or
psychological disorders were recruited. Two tests were used
involving faces expressing 5 basic emotions (happiness,
sadness, fear, anger and disgust) or neutral expressions. The
first test was designed to assess participants’ implicit

30

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

functionality must consider the key role played by affective
and motivational factors.

in a process theorized to foster calm behavioral states and
spur social engagement (Porges, 2007). One measure of this
effect is resting respiratory sinus arrhythmia (rRSA). Studies
have shown associations between rRSA and increased
emotion regulation (Fabes & Eisenberg, 1997), and
heightened experience of pro-social states like compassion
(Oveis et al., 2009). This study investigated the relationship
between rRSA and neural correlates of emotional and social
cognitive processes. To achieve this aim, subjects (n=10; 6
female) viewed blocks of slides designed to elicit several
social and nonsocial states (pleasure, pride, compassion, and
neutral) during fMRI scanning, and provided rRSA during a
separate, non-fMRI resting condition. Regression analyses
between individual rRSA values and neural responses to
slides were performed. With respect to the pleasure slides,
rRSA predicted bilateral TPJ which has been implicated in
theory of mind, mirroring and perspective taking (Saxe &
Powell, 2006), as well as nucleus accumbens, a classic
reward response that indicates hedonic pleasure (Knutson &
Cooper, 2005). In response to both the pride and neutral
slides, rRSA predicted activation in the left temporal
parietal junction (TPJ), and in the medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC), an area involved in inferring one’s own, and
others’ mental states (Mitchell, Banaji, & Macrae, 2005). In
the compassion condition, rRSA predicted activation both in
the mPFC, and in the superior parietal cortex, which has
been implicated in evaluating social distance (Yamakawa,
Kanai, Matsumura, & Naito, 2009). These patterns of
activation suggest that greater tonic influence of the
myelinated vagus on heart rate, as indexed by rRSA, relates
to more socially attuned responding.

H4
IS ECSTASY AN ‘EMPATHOGEN’? MDMA INCREASES
SOCIAL
FEELINGS
WHILE
BLUNTING
IDENTIFICATION OF NEGATIVE EMOTIONS IN
OTHERS
Gillinder Bedi,
Human Behavioral
Pharmacology Laboratory, University of Chicago, Division on
Substance Abuse, New York State Psychiatric Institute, and
Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Columbia University; Harriet de Wit, Human Behavioral
Pharmacology Laboratory, University of Chicago – The
psychoactive
drug
MDMA
(Â±3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, ‘ecstasy’) is believed to produce unusual
effects, including increased empathy, sociability, and
interpersonal closeness. These so-called ‘empathogenic’
effects appear to motivate recreational ecstasy use; they also
underpin the rationale for use of MDMA as an adjunct to
psychotherapy. Mechanisms and defining characteristics of
these effects are poorly understood. In this study, we
investigated effects of controlled MDMA administration on
empathogenic feelings and emotional identification skills in
humans. Over four sessions, healthy ecstasy-using
volunteers (N=21) received MDMA (0.75mg/kg; 1.5mg/kg),
methamphetamine (20mg; METH), and placebo (PBO)
under double-blind, randomized conditions. Participants
provided self-reports of empathogenic affective states.
During peak drug effects, they underwent standardized
tests of identification of emotions in others based on facial
expressions and vocal cues. Both MDMA (1.5mg/kg) and
METH increased self-reported sociability and playfulness,
whereas only MDMA (1.5mg/kg) enhanced loving feelings
and friendliness. MDMA (1.5mg/kg) decreased accuracy of
recognizing fearful and sad facial expressions relative to
PBO. MDMA (1.5mg/kg) also marginally reduced
identification of vocal sadness compared to PBO and
METH. Although MDMA increases empathogen-like
subjective effects, it may reduce accurate identification of
negative emotional signals in others. These socio-emotional
cognitive effects appear consistent with enhanced
sociability, but not with increased empathy, after MDMA.
These findings, suggesting that MDMA directly alters socioemotional cognition, have important implications for
recreational and therapeutic MDMA use. Future
investigations employing an integrative neuroscience
approach could provide valuable insights into the role of
socio-emotional processes in acute and longer-term effects
of other psychoactive drugs. Supported by NIDA DA02812.

H6
SADNESS PERCEPTION IN FACIAL AND NON FACELIKE STIMULI Mariam Chammat, CNRS-UPMC USR 3246,
CRICM, CHU Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France; Aurelie Foucher,
CNRS-UPMC USR 3246, CRICM, CHU Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris,
France; Jacqueline Nadel, CNRS-UPMC USR 3246, CRICM,
CHU Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France; Stephanie Dubal, CNRSUPMC USR 3246, CRICM, CHU Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France
– Human faces are the main emotion displayers. Knowing
that emotional compared to neutral stimuli elicit enlarged
ERP components at the perceptual level, one may wonder
whether this has lead to an emotional facilitation bias
toward human faces. To contribute to this question, we
measured the P1 and N170 components of the ERPs elicited
by human compared to robotic emotional stimuli.
Electroencephalograms (EEGs) were acquired from 62
Electrodes from 15 healthy subjects during the presentation
of sad and neutral pictures of human versus robotic heads.
Inverted pictures were used as a control condition. Sad
expressions were detected faster than neutral ones
regardless of the media. This emotional facilitation
coincided with an increase in P1 amplitude in response to
emotional images compared to neutral images, supporting
an early perceptual amplification for sadness information.
P1 and N170 latencies were delayed and N170 amplitude
was increased in response to human compared to robotic

H5
RESTING RSA PREDICTS GREATER ENGAGEMENT
OF SOCIAL COGNITIVE AREAS IN BOLD RESPONSE
TO EMOTIONALLY HETEROGENEOUS SLIDES.
Elizabeth Castle, UC Berkeley; Emiliana Simon-Thomas, UC
Berkeley; June Gruber, Yale University; Alex Kogan, Hong Kong
University; Dacher Keltner, UC Berkeley – The myelinated
branch of the vagus nerve slows heart rate during expiration

31

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

stimuli. Inversion produced higher P1 amplitude and
inverted human images only, led to delayed P1 and N170
latencies and increased N170 amplitude. As already found
in a first experiment with robotic and human displays of
joy, our results show that facilitation is not biased to human
faces but rather extends to non-human displays,
underscoring our capacity to read emotion beyond faces.
Interesting inversion effects arise from our study posing
further questions as to the relations between images and the
semantics attributed to them. Keywords: ERP, P1, N170,
Inversion, face and non face-like stimuli

aversive pictures (IAPS) in meditation practitioners and
controls. Interestingly, although participants in both groups
reported reduced emotional experience to aversive visual
stimuli after reappraisal, only the yogic meditation group
showed neurophysiological signs of reduced negative
emotions after reappraisal of the pictures. The magnitude of
the late LPP, an affective-related ERP components over the
parietal areas, was reduced after reappraisal of aversive
pictures in the yogic meditation group, but not in the
control group. This might be an indication of increased
ability to regulate emotions in the meditation group
compared to the controls.

H7
THE NEURAL SYSTEMS THAT RESPOND TO
EMOTIONAL STIMULI WITH PHYLOGENETIC AND
ONTOGENETIC SIGNIFICANCE Joaquin de Rojas, Boston
College; Elizabeth Kensinger, Boston College – Neural and
behavioral responses to emotional stimuli often are
discussed within an evolutionary framework. Although
some of the information that elicits an emotional response is
likely to have had evolutionary significance (e.g., snakes,
spiders), many other stimuli would not have been
evolutionarily relevant (e.g., guns, grenades). The present
study re-analyzed data from two fMRI studies (Kensinger et
al., 2007; Kensinger & Schacter, 2008) to examine whether
the neural systems that respond to emotional stimuli differ
depending upon whether those stimuli were of
phylogenetic or ontogenetic significance. The results
revealed that when stimuli were ontogenetic, activity was
increased in regions of the anterior cingulate and
orbitofrontal cortices. By contrast, when stimuli were
phylogenetic, activity was increased in a region spanning
the lingual and fusiform gyri. These results suggest that
there can be differences in how emotional stimuli are
processed, and those differences can depend upon the
stimuli’s evolutionary significance.

H9
GENETIC
CONTRIBUTIONS
TO
EXTINCTION
RETENTION IN HUMANS Catherine A. Hartley,
Department of Psychology, New York University; Rabia Salman,
Department of Psychology, New York University; Ashley
Richman, Department of Psychology, New York University; BJ
Casey, Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill
Medical College of Cornell University; Charles Glatt, Sackler
Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College
of Cornell University; Elizabeth A. Phelps, Department of
Psychology, Center For Neural Science, New York University –
The ability to adjust our emotional responses to changing
circumstances is critical for our psychological well-being.
Extinction is one way of modifying previously learned
emotional associations. During fear conditioning, a neutral
stimulus acquires emotional salience through pairing with
an aversive reinforcer. During extinction, fear expression
decreases as the conditioned stimulus is presented without
reinforcement. The acquisition and retention of extinction
learning over time is thought to confer resilience against
anxiety-related clinical disorders. However, factors that give
rise to individual differences in extinction retention are not
well understood. Evidence from animal models suggests
that the serotonin transporter gene may influence extinction
retention. A recent study reported that mice lacking the
serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene exhibit impaired
extinction retention (Wellman et al., 2007). Previous research
has found that human carriers of the low-expressing short
allele variant of the 5-HTT gene have reduced volume in
and functional connectivity between the amygdala and
vmPFC, regions believed to support extinction retention
(Pezawas et al., 2005). In our study, we investigated whether
carriers of the 5-HTT short allele exhibit reduced ability to
retain extinction learning. We utilized a two-day aversive
conditioning paradigm, probabilistically pairing visual
stimuli with electric shock. Day one consisted of the
acquisition and the initial extinction phase. Day two
consisted of the extinction retention test phase, allowing us
to determine whether participants retained extinction
learning from the first day. Preliminary results revealed that
participants carrying the short allele variant of the 5-HTT
gene showed reduced extinction retention, suggesting that
genetic variation may contribute to individual differences in
the ability to successfully extinguish conditioned fear
responses.

H8
COGNITIVE
EMOTION
REGULATION
IN
MEDITATION PRACTITIONERS: AN EEG STUDY
Liselotte Gootjes, Erasmus Affective Neuroscience Lab, Institute
for Psychology, Erasmus University Rotterdam; Ingmar H.A.
Franken, Erasmus Affective Neuroscience Lab, Institute for
Psychology, Erasmus University Rotterdam; Jan W. Van Strien,
Erasmus Affective Neuroscience Lab, Institute for Psychology,
Erasmus University Rotterdam – The ability to successfully
handle our emotions contributes greatly to mental and
physical health and well-being. Cognitive reappraisal is one
aspect of emotion regulation and involves the
reinterpretation of an aversive event in such a way that it
generates less negative emotions. Recently, there is a
growing interest in the possible effects of meditation as an
attentional and emotional regulatory strategy. Findings of
beneficial effects of meditation and related practices like
yoga and yogic breathing on attention and emotion, raises
the question whether these techniques facilitate successful
emotion regulation. In the present study, we examined the
neurophysiological correlates of cognitive reappraisal of

32

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

H10
HUMANIZING
EXTREME
OUTGROUPS:
THE
EFFICACY OF CBT TREATMENT FOR SOCIAL
DISGUST Claire Hoogendoorn, New York University,
Psychology Department; Lasana Harris, New York University,
Psychology Department; Ashley Shurick, New York University,
Psychology Department; Amy Krain, New York University,
Psychology Department, New York University, Center for Neural
Science, New York University Medical School, Child and
Adolescent Psychology; Elizabeth Phelps, New York University,
Psychology Department, New York University, Center for Neural
Science – People and other causes including food, decay, and
objects elicit disgust. However, it is unique because unlike
other social emotions (e.g. pride, envy and pity), it is not
restricted to people as the attitude-object. People feel social
disgust toward traditionally dehumanized groups (Fiske,
Cuddy, Glick, & Fiske, 2002) and show insula and amygdala
activity (Harris & Fiske, 2006). Cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT) lowers disgust responses and decreases insula
activity in phobia research involving fear and disgust
inducing stimuli (Hunter & Anthony, 2009; Schienle, Shafer,
Stark & Vaitl, 2009). Electromyography (EMG) data was
collected from the levator labii of 14 participants while they
viewed images eliciting social disgust or neutral emotions.
The experimental group received CBT treatment (the control
group did not) aimed at reducing their disgust response to
the social disgust groups. Participants returned one week
after noting initial thoughts and emotions (the control
condition did the same but did not practice CBT technique)
and again underwent EMG data collection. Results indicate
a significant difference between individuals who received
and applied CBT compared to the control. CBT may be
more effective in reducing disgust for individuals with high
trait disgust sensitivity compared to individuals with lower
trait disgust sensitivity. We intend to explore neural
differences between these two groups to discover pathways
that regulate disgust.

neural systems that differentiate valence and bias across
social targets that vary in their elicitation of positivity
motivation (self, close other, non-close other). Ventral
anterior cingulate cortex differentiated the valence of traits
and this effect was modulated by intimacy with the social
target. However, ventral anterior cingulate did not predict
bias. Instead, bias was characterized by reduced recruitment
of regions associated with cognitive control (e.g.,
orbitofrontal cortex, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex) when
compared to accuracy. These neural findings suggest a new
neural model of social evaluation bias. Furthermore,
researchers have debated whether cognitive control
characterizes bias or accuracy in social evaluation. These
findings suggest that accuracy is characterized by greater
cognitive control over information processing whereas bias
likely reflects the use of heuristics. Furthermore, the
heuristic approach to social evaluations is likely increased
by positivity motivation.
H12
SOCIAL WARMTH: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF
FEELINGS OF SOCIAL CONNECTION Tristen K. Inagaki,
University of California, Los Angeles; Naomi I. Eisenberger,
University of California, Los Angeles – While social ties are
important for well-being, the underlying mechanisms that
make these connections beneficial are less understood. One
aspect of close relationships that makes them particularly
pleasing is the warm and tender feelings that stem from
feeling connected, calm, and safe with another person, a
feeling state we call “social warmth.” These warm feelings
are thought to result from an opioid-mediated
consummatory state, in which the goal of social connection
has been achieved and the individual is in a state of
satisfaction or physiological quiescence (Depue & MorroneStrupinksy, 2005). To date, the neural basis of this
consummatory side of relationships has remained largely
unexplored. In this study, romantically attached female
participants viewed social warmth pictures (pictures of
mothers caressing their babies) in an fMRI scanner as well
as control images (pictures of mothers and babies eating,
walking). After the scan, participants rated the extent to
which the pictures made them feel social warmth (“loving,”
“connected”). Neuroimaging results revealed that greater
feelings of social warmth were associated with increased
activity in several regions of the anterior cingulate cortex,
fitting with this region’s role in opioid-related processes.
Additionally, deactivations found in regions associated with
regulatory and self-processing (lateral and medial prefrontal
cortex) suggest a relief state induced by viewing the social
warmth pictures. Taken together, these results suggest a
mechanism by which social warmth is pleasing.

H11
REDUCED
COGNITIVE
CONTROL
SUPPORTS
POSITIVITY BIASES IN SOCIAL EVALUATION Brent L.
Hughes, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at
Austin; Jennifer S. Beer, Department of Psychology, University of
Texas at Austin – Evaluations of self and close others are
characterized by bias; evaluations to be unrealistically
positive compared to objective criteria. Previous neural
investigations have mostly operationalized self-evaluation
bias by comparing judgments of positive characteristics to
judgments of negative characteristics. This research has
concluded that biased evaluations are supported by ventral
anterior cingulate cortex. However, valence and degree of
bias need to be treated as independent factors because
people bias their evaluations of both positive and negative
information. When positivity motivations are activated, bias
is reflected in people’s tendency to overclaim positive
attributes and to underclaim negative attributes.
Additionally, no neural research has examined evaluation
bias for other people. The current research examined the

H13
SOCIAL MIRRORING: THE ROLE OF MIRROR
NEURONS IN DECODING EMOTIONS FROM
ACTIONS Rajesh K. Kana Ph.D., University of Alabama
Birmingham; Christopher C. Klein, M.A., University of Alabama;
Brittany G.Travers, M.A., University of Alabama –

33

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

Understanding the actions and emotions of others is critical
in navigating the social world. The human brain seems to be
endowed with structures (such as mirror neurons) that are
active both during the first-and third-person experience of
actions and emotions. The primary goal of this fMRI study
is to examine the role of mirror neurons in action
recognition in general, and decoding emotions from actions
in particular. Fifteen healthy right-handed adults (mean age
= 20.6 years; data collection ongoing) from the University of
Alabama-Birmingham community participated in the fMRI
study. Participants were presented with still images of stick
figure characters depicting actions in a randomized blocked
design format. In the physical condition, participants
identified the physical action depicted by the stick figure
(e.g. cartwheeling). In the emotion condition, participants
identified the emotion or mood depicted by the stick figure
(e.g. sad). fMRI data acquired on a Siemens 3.0T Allegra
scanner at UAB was analyzed using SPM2. We found
increased activation for emotion recognition when
compared to physical action recognition in the bilateral
inferior frontal gyri (a pivotal component of the mirror
neuron system). In addition, several areas activated more in
emotional condition: right superior temporal gyrus, left
fusiform gyrus, and orbitofrontal cortex. Functional
connectivity analysis revealed increased connectivity in the
physical condition, mainly between the ventral temporal
and parietal areas. The findings of this study indicate the
specific role of mirror neurons in emotional aspects of action
understanding, which has direct implications for core social
functions like empathy.

of commission, suggesting diminished evaluative reactivity
following erroneous performance. Taken together, the
results indicate that marijuana use is related to decrements
in neural processes of both response inhibition and error
monitoring.
H15
AGING AND EMOTION REGULATION: AN ERP
STUDY Sandra J. E. Langeslag, Erasmus University Rotterdam;
Jan W. Van Strien, Erasmus University Rotterdam – It has been
suggested that emotion regulation improves across the lifespan. Event-related potential (ERP) studies with younger
adults have revealed that the amplitude of the Late Positive
Potential (LPP), which is typically larger for emotional than
neutral pictures, is reduced when participants are instructed
to decrease feelings elicited by emotional pictures. In this
study, we investigate age differences in emotion regulation
by studying the LPP amplitude. We hypothesized that
emotion regulation effects would be larger in older than
younger adults. Younger (18-26 yrs) and older (60-77 yrs)
participants completed an emotion regulation task while
their EEG was recorded. First, participants were instructed
to simply view neutral, unpleasant, and pleasant pictures.
Then, they viewed either unpleasant or pleasant pictures
and were instructed to either increase or decrease the
elicited feelings. Between 700-1000 ms, the LPP was more
positive for emotional than neutral pictures in the view
condition, and for unpleasant compared to pleasant pictures
in all instruction conditions. An instruction effect was
present between 150-1000 ms, with the ERP being more
positive in the increase than in the view and decrease
conditions. The ERP in the view and decrease conditions in
general did not differ. Thus, we show that, when presenting
relatively low arousing pictures, LPP amplitude
enhancement when increasing feelings can be observed.
Most relevant, however, is that we did not observe any age
differences in valence or instruction effects on the ERP.
Thus, our data do not support the notion that emotion
regulation changes with aging.

H14
RESPONSE INHIBITION AND ERROR MONITORING
DEFICITS ASSOCIATED WITH MARIJUANA USE Jesse
T. Kaye, University of Colorado – Boulder; Tiffany A. Ito,
University of Colorado - Boulder – Cognitive theories of drug
addiction highlight trait deficits in executive functions, such
as response inhibition, as a predisposition to problematic
drug use; difficulties with response inhibition may impair
ones ability to override pre-potent drug use behaviors that
have become habitual and automatized, in favor of more
adaptive goal-directed behaviors (i.e., abstinence; Tiffany,
1990). The current study investigated the relationship
between marijuana use and executive function by recording
ERPs during a go/no-go task. On correct trials, we
examined the N2 component, which is thought to reflect
response conflict associated with the need for inhibition.
For trials on which participants made a behavioral response,
we analyzed the ERN and Pe. Consistent with previous
go/no-go studies, N2s were larger on correct no-go than go
trials, likely reflecting greater conflict and need for control
when inhibiting the prepotent go response. ERNs and Pes
were larger following false alarms than hits, reflecting
conflict detection and reactions to errors. Of greater
interest, marijuana users displayed decreased no-go N2
effects, suggesting poorer response inhibition associated
with heavy marijuana use. Additionally, more frequent
marijuana use was associated with a smaller Pe after errors

H16
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL
MECHANISMS
OF
SUCCESSFUL
AND
UNSUCCESSFUL EMOTION REGULATION Christina M.
Leclerc, Boston College; Elizabeth A. Kensinger, Boston College –
The ability to regulate emotion has many important
implications in daily life. Recent research has begun to
outline the neural mechanisms of the cognitive regulation of
emotional stimuli in younger adults, however, less is known
about the neural mechanisms of these processes in the older
adult population.
The current work used functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate the neural
systems associated with successful and unsuccessful
attempts to cognitively reappraise emotional images.
Participants were asked to up or down regulate their
emotional reactions to positive and negative photographs,
with ratings of self-reported arousal given both before and
after reappraisal. Successful trials were defined as those

34

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

H18
NEURAL CORRELATES OF GUILT Rajendra A. Morey,
Duke Univeristy; Srishti Seth, Duke University; Gregory
McCarthy, Yale Univeristy; Elizabeth S. Selgrade, Durham VA
Medical Center; Jessica D. Nasser, Durham VA Medical Center;
Kevin LaBar, Duke University – Guilt plays an important
factor in governing social behavior and promoting
compliance with social norms. The experience of guilt
depends on the self’s role in the event causing guilt and the
perceived negative consequences to others. We compared
neural activation evoked by reading of neutral scenarios
and guilt scenarios in which the participant’s actions result
in negative consequences to himself (GuiltSelf) or negative
consequences to others (GuiltOther). Sixteen male subjects
participated in this fMRI study, and provided subjective
ratings of guilt feelings after reading each scenario. The
GuiltOther condition led to greater subjective guilt than the
GuiltSelf condition. The contrast for GuiltOther > GuiltSelf
revealed differential activation of dorsomedial PFC, right
posterior superior temporal sulcus (STS), precuneus,
caudate, and left inferior PFC. The contribution of guilt,
independent of perspective taking, was assessed by
regressing guilt ratings with trials combined from
GuiltOther, GuiltSelf, and Neutral conditions. This analysis
revealed differential activation in the right posterior STS,
precuneus, dorsomedial PFC, and caudate. These two
analysis approaches, associated with guilt feelings and
perspective-taking related to negative consequences,
pointed to common regions of differential activity including
the right posterior STS, dorsomedial PFC, caudate,
precuneus, and left inferior prefrontal cortex. Our findings
shed light on the network of regions involved in guilt and
the perceived the role of self on negative consequences for
self and others. This work will inform future clinical
research studies in posttraumatic stress disorder and
depression where guilt can be a prominent symptom.

where compared to the pre-appraisal ratings, the postappraisal ratings were higher when participants were asked
to increase their emotional reaction, lower for trials when
they were instructed to decrease their emotional reaction,
and unchanged for trials when they were asked to simply
view the images. Functional MRI results indicated differing
patterns of neural activation as the two age groups
successfully and unsuccessfully regulated their emotions.
Older adults exhibited a clear pattern of increased prefrontal
cortex activation for trials in which they successfully
regulated their emotional reaction to the image, whereas
younger adults did not show such a pattern. These results
suggest that, in the context of a deliberative emotional
reappraisal task, older adults recruit additional prefrontal
cortex activation than younger adults in order to
successfully complete the task.
H17
REGULATION WITHOUT INTENTION?: NEURAL
CORRELATES OF INCIDENTAL REGULATION OF
RESPONSES TO ATTRACTIVE OTHERS Meghan L.
Meyer, University of California, Los Angeles; Elliot T. Berkman,
University of California, Los Angeles; Johan C. Karremans,
Radboud University Nijmegen; Matthew D. Lieberman,
University of California, Los Angeles – Investigations into the
neural systems involved in emotion regulation have
predominantly examined deliberative and intentional
strategies such as reappraisal. Behavioral research has
identified other forms of emotion regulation that take place
without intention and outside of awareness, but the neural
mechanisms involved in these forms of regulation have
remained unexamined. How might the brain systems
involved in deliberative/intentional versus incidental/
unintentional emotion regulation be similar or different?
The present study addresses this question by examining one
kind of unintentional regulation. Previous behavioral
research has shown that romantically attached participants
tend to derogate the attractiveness of opposite-sex others in
a free response period but not when under cognitive load.
Importantly, participants have no instruction to deliberately
regulate their responses in this way and funneled debriefing
suggests that they are unaware of doing so. We had
romantically attached participants indicate whether they
would consider each of a series of attractive and
unattractive opposite-sex others as a hypothetical dating
partner while undergoing fMRI scanning. This task was
completed both without (and with) time pressure to allow
participants to regulate their responses (or not). Behavioral
results confirm the finding that attached participants
consider attractive opposite-sex others as dating partners
more frequently under time pressure than not. On trials
when they successfully derogated attractive others
(compared to when they did not), participants recruited
several brain regions implicated in deliberative emotion
regulation such as the ventral and dorsal lateral prefrontal
cortices, and others that have been observed in other
incidental processes such as the rostral ACC.

H19
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION:
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN RESPONSE TO
SURPRISED FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Maital Neta,
Dartmouth College; M. Justin Kim, Dartmouth College;
Catherine J. Norris, Dartmouth College; Paul J. Whalen,
Dartmouth College – In previous research, we found that
activity in the corrugator supercilii muscle region in
response to surprised facial expressions reflected individual
differences in positivity-negativity bias, rather than valence
ratings on a given trial. Moreover, neuroimaging studies
have shown that negative versus positive interpretations of
surprised faces are correlated with distinct inverse reactivity
patterns between the amygdala and a region of the ventral
anterior cingulate cortex. This lends support to the notion
that surprised faces are a useful tool for examining
individual differences in positivity-negativity bias. Here, we
sought to dissociate neural activity to a facial expression of
ambiguous valence (i.e., surprise) when contrasted with
expressions of clear valence at both ends of the valence
continuum (e.g., happy, angry). We found greater activity in

35

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

dorsal anterior cingulate cortex as well as frontal operculum
to surprise when compared to angry and happy faces,
consistent with previous data showing that these regions
play a role in conflict monitoring and ambiguity resolution,
respectively. When we compared subjects who interpreted
surprise positively vs. negatively, we observed activation in
a region of ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in response to
surprise vs. angry and happy faces. Responses in this
region, previously implicated in regulatory processes, were
functionally coupled with parahippocampal cortex and
posterior cingulate in the presence of ambiguity (i.e.,
surprised faces).

components that underlie the contribution of self-referential
thinking to emotional judgment using fMRI. It was
suggested that emotional judgments would involve a
greater extent of simulation processes as the similarity
between the observer and the protagonist grows. Prior to
the scan, similarity between self and others was evaluated
implicitly by the subjects via questionnaire. Afterward,
subjects underwent fMRI scan while making emotional
judgments for self, similar and dissimilar others. Results
show a significant activation of the hippocampal formation
during emotional judgments for self, especially for negative
events. More interestingly, an interaction was found in the
hippocampal formation for emotional judgments for others;
the hippocampus was significantly more active during
mentalization about negative events happening to similar as
compared to dissimilar others. These results suggest that the
hippocampal formation plays a vital role in emotional
judgments of self and others. Specifically, it is part of the
simulation matrix which mediates this process by means of
self referential thinking and remembering. It is speculated
that the perceived similarity between self and other and the
emotional valence of the event mediate the participation of
the hippocampus in mentalizing processes.

H20
NEURAL CORRELATES OF REFLECTION ON GOALS:
DISTINGUISHING
DOMAIN-SPECIFIC
FROM
DOMAIN-GENERAL PROCESSES Dominic Packer, Lehigh
University; William Cunningham, The Ohio State University –
Effective self-regulation requires the ability to consider
alternate goal states in order to adapt to shifting
circumstances. Previous research on goal reflection has
identified goal-type dissociations in brain regions broadly
associated with self-projection. Importantly, however, there
is a need to distinguish activation differences due to
recruitment of distinct processes from activations that reflect
common processes with varying levels of recruitment. The
fact that different types of goals tend to covary naturally
with time allowed us to vary the difficulty of goal reflection
across content domains. Participants in an fMRI study
thought about promotion or prevention goals at three time
points. Goals that varied in terms of content, time-frame,
valence, and abstractness but were difficult to construct
(relative to other goals) activated an area of dorsal medial
PFC, suggesting that this region may support generalpurpose projective processes. In contrast, goals that were
easy to construct activated a region of dorsolateral PFC
involved in domaingeneral memory retrieval. Importantly,
we also observed domain-specific effects of goal type and
temporal distance; promotion goals were associated with
heightened activity in medial PFC, short-term goals
activated precuneus and anterior cingulate cortex, and
longer-term goals activated frontal areas, including
ventrolateral PFC and orbitofrontal cortex.

H22
INTEGRATION OF ANXIETY AND MEMORY IN
ANTERIOR AND POSTERIOR HIPPOCAMPUS Ajay B.
Satpute, Columbia University; Bruce D. Naliboff, University of
California, Los Angeles; Jeanette A. Mumford, University of
California, Los Angeles; Russell A. Poldrack, University of
California, Los Angeles – Several recent reviews on the
neurobiological bases of anxiety have implicated the
hippocampus as a critical structure. Studies conducted
primarily in rodents have suggested that the ventral
(anterior in humans) hippocampus may be particularly
implicated in anxiety, whereas the dorsal (posterior in
humans) hippocampus is more specific to mnemonic
functions. In addition, the anterior but not posterior
hippocampus projects to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex,
which is commonly involved in emotion regulation. In
humans, fMRI studies have frequently implicated both
anterior and posterior hippocampus in memory processes.
Here we examine the relationship of anterior and posterior
hippocampus while in a context of learning, and while
under hi or low state anxiety. Participants engaged in a
classification-learning task while under threat or no threat
conditions. Anterior hippocampus was specifically related
to self-reported anxiety and functionally related to VMPFC
activity but only during conditions of threat. Posterior
hippocampus was not. Intriguingly however, posterior
hippocampus was related to trait anxiety. In combination
with the existing literature on the role of memory in the
hippocampus,
the
results
suggest
a
processing
differentiation
between
anterior
and
posterior
hippocampus, as well as an integration of processes
underlying the mnemonic and anxiety-related functions of
the hippocampus.

H21
THE ROLE OF THE HIPPOCAMPAL FORMATION IN
SIMULATION -AN FMRI STUDY Perry, D., Department of
Psychology, University of Haifa; Hendler, T., Psychology
Department and Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University;
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Department of Psychology, University of
Haifa – It has been argued that the hippocampal formation is
part of the simulation matrix. This matrix enables an
analogical mapping between the observer and the
protagonist's emotions, in order to draw inferences about
others. The mapping process relies on self- referential
thinking and autobiographical memory. In order to assess
the role of the hippocampal formation in simulation
processes we examined the behavioral and neuronal

36

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

H23
EMOTIONAL CONTENT DOES NOT MODULATE
ACTIVITY IN THE SCENE PROCESSING REGIONS OF
THE VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM Damian A. Stanley, New
York University; Ashley A. Shurick, New York University; Sonya
Dougal, New York University; Elizabeth A. Phelps, New York
University – Previous fMRI studies have demonstrated that
early visual cortex and face-processing regions in the ventral
visual stream show greater activity for emotional than
neutral faces (see Stanley et al., 2009 for review).
Conversely, recent studies have found increased memoryrelated activation in scene-processing regions of the
parahippocampal cortex for neutral versus emotional scenes
(Dolcos et al., 2004; Sharot et al., 2004). To systematically
investigate how emotion modulates activity in scene
processing regions of the ventral visual cortex we developed
and normed a set of emotional images with neutral
counterparts that were matched for scene content. FMRI
data was acquired using a blocked design while subjects
(N=36) viewed neutral and emotional faces and scenes. In a
separate run, subjects viewed faces, scenes, objects, and
their phase-scrambled counterparts (e.g., Epstein &
Kanwisher, 1998) allowing us to independently localize the
parahippocampal place area (PPA) and fusiform face area
(FFA). An ROI analysis revealed no difference in activity for
neutral versus emotional scenes in the PPA, presumably
because we equated the scene content of our picture set
whereas previous studies did not. Activation in the left FFA
was greater for emotional versus neutral scenes with a trend
for emotional versus neutral faces. The amygdala response
was greater for emotional than neutral scenes with no
difference in activation for emotional versus neutral faces.
These results suggest that emotion differentially modulates
activity in the ventral visual stream, and these structures
may be sensitive to domain specific aspects of the emotional
content of the scenes.

of leftward vs rightward deviation were recorded and an
average deviation from the midline over all lines was
obtained from each participant. ANOVA of the number of
leftward vs rightward displacements with induced emotion
(positive or negative) as the repeated measure revealed
significantly more leftward displacement under negative
emotion. Our results confirm previous findings of a
leftward bias (so-called “pseudoneglect”) in normal
participants when bisecting horizontal lines (Jewell, 2000).
Considering the number of leftward vs rightward
deviations, participants showed significant more leftward
shift remembering negative autobiographical events. The
phenomenon of “pseudoneglect” is significantly enhanced
by negative emotion.
H25
MOOD INDUCTION EFFECTS ON COGNITIVE
RESOURCES IN BEHAVIORAL INHIBITION Nicholas T.
Van Dam, University at Albany, SUNY; Cheryl Seifert,
University at Albany, SUNY; Mitch Earleywine, University at
Albany, SUNY – The role of mood in executive function is
controversial, with positive and negative mood producing
facilitative, impairing, or no effects in different cognitive
paradigms. One important dimension of executive function
is behavioral inhibition. Despite being a key construct of
executive function, there is a paucity of research examining
mood’s impact on behavioral inhibition. In the current
study, participants completed a stop signal task before and
after a randomly assigned mood induction (a narrated
powerpoint containing 12 Velten statements accompanied
by mood-congruent music). Based on preliminary findings
(n = 50 across 3 groups), only participants in the negative
(sad) mood induction reported a significant change in
mood. Prior to the mood induction, participants low in selfrated happiness required marginally more immediate
inhibition signals to successfully inhibit responses than
those high in self-rated happiness. Relative to the negative
mood induction and neutral control, positive mood
induction significantly decreased the cognitive processing
time necessary to inhibit responses. These findings suggest
emotional facilitation of available cognitive resources in
behavioral inhibition, and have implications in terms of
understanding interactions between emotional states,
cognitive function and the capacity to inhibit unwanted
behaviors.

H24
REMEMBERING
NEGATIVE
EVENTS
INDUCE
LEFTWARD DEVIATION IN A LINE BISECTION TASK
Corinne Tamagni, Department of Neurology, Unit of
Neuropsychology, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland;
Simona Croce, University of Zurich, Switzerland; Veronique
Wettstein, University of Zurich, Switzerland; Peter Brugger,
Department of Neurology, Unit of Neuropsychology, University
Hospital Zurich, Switzerland – Previous studies suggest a
relation between emotion and spatial attention. More
specifically, personality traits like optimism or positive
mood were found to be associated with a rightward
orientation preference (Drake, 1992; Gasper, 2002). In this
study, we investigated whether inducing positive or
negative emotions while bisecting lines may have opposite
effects on the direction of error. Participants (40 healthy
right-handed adults) were required to mark the midpoint of
each of 24 horizontal lines (line lengths 26 cm) with a sharp
pencil held in the dominant right hand. While executing this
task, each adult participant was asked to try to remember a
positive or a negative autobiographical event. The number

H26
THE LIMITED RESOURCES OF MOTIVATIONAL
PROCESSING Lotte F. Van Dillen, Utrecht University; Belle
Derks, Leiden University; Dirk Heslenfeld, VU University;
Sander L. Koole, VU University – Attention plays a crucial role
in motivational processes. Most researchers agree that the
more people direct their attention to motivationally salient
cues, the more the stimulus input determines people’s
experiences and responses in that situation. The central
question of this presentation is whether attention to
motivationally salient cues is fixed, or whether contextual
factors may alter attentional processing of motivational

37

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

salience. On the one hand, research proposes that
motivationally salient cues are automatically derived from
the environment. On the other hand recent studies suggest
that cognitive load attenuates attention to information when
this information bears no relevance for current task
performance. fMRI, EEG, and behavioral findings will be
presented that demonstrate how the selective processing of
motivationally salient cues, such as emotional scenes,
desirable food items, and attractive opposite-sex partners,
may be contingent on the availability of cognitive resources.
Results show that, in line with an automatic vigilance
account, people selectively attend to motivationally salient
cues, but only when concurrent task load is low. When
cognitive load of a focal task is high, people no longer
display such an attention bias. In addition, self-reported
differences in attentional control, deprivation, and
susceptibility to temptation seem to moderate participants’
attention bias to motivationally salient cues, but only when
ample cognitive resources are available. Together, these
findings suggest that people automatically direct their
attention to motivationally salient cues in their
environment, but that this attention bias may be contingent
on cognitive capacity.

continuous recognition paradigm, each face was presented
twice in a random fashion, and participants had to make
‘old’ vs. ‘new’ decisions. The behavioral data demonstrated
an emotion-induced recognition bias reflecting the tendency
to classify fearful faces as ‘old’ and neutral faces as ‘new’,
irrespective of their true old or new status. For the N400
component we found that the second presentation of faces
resulted in a more positive going waveform compared to
the first presentation, as did the presentation of fearful faces
compared to neutral faces. No N400 interaction of old/new
and emotion was found. For the LPC however, this
interaction was significant, with much larger old/new
effects for neutral compared to fearful faces at central and
parietal sites. The attenuation of the LPC old/new effect for
fearful faces appeared to be a consequence of the much
more positive LPC waveform for ‘new’ fearful than for
‘new’ neutral faces. The ERP results indicate that fearful
facial expressions modulate recollection rather than
familiarity.
H29
EXPENDING COGNITIVE EFFORT LEADS TO
EMOTIONAL DYREGULATION Dylan D. Wagner,
Dartmouth College; Todd F. Heatherton, Dartmouth College –
Failure to appropriately regulate one’s emotions is a
hallmark of many clinical psychiatric disorders. Evidence
from brain imaging research has focused on an amygdala
prefrontal pathway involved in successful emotion
regulation and is often impaired in mood disorders such as
PTSD and depression. Findings from research on selfregulation have repeatedly demonstrated that engaging in
effortful emotion regulation tasks impairs attempts at selfregulation in cognitive and social domains. In the present
study, we tested whether engaging in effortful selfregulation in the cognitive domain would disrupt the
prefrontal amygdala circuit, leading to dysregulation of
amygdala response to negatively valenced stimuli.
Participants viewed two blocks of valenced images during
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Task blocks
were separated by a depletion task which required
participants to engage in effortful attention control. Prior to
the depletion task activity in the amygdala when viewing
negatively valenced images was inversely correlated with a
region of ventral PFC associated with emotion regulation.
Cognitive depletion disrupted the prefrontal amygdala
circuit leading to a positive response in both amygdala and
PFC following depletion. These findings suggest that
prefrontal regulation of amygdala response draws from a
limited resource which can be depleted by acts of selfregulation.

H27
POSITIVE AFFECT AND EXECUTIVE CONTROL Henk
van Steenbergen, Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden
University Institute for Psychological Research, The Netherlands;
Guido P.H. Band, Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition,
Leiden University Institute for Psychological Research, The
Netherlands; Bernhard Hommel, Leiden Institute for Brain and
Cognition, Leiden University Institute for Psychological Research,
The Netherlands – Positive affect is known to influence
performance in several cognitive tasks. We address the
question how short- and long-term positive emotions
influence performance in attention and cognitive control
paradigms. We will discuss a series of experiments which
provide strong indications that positive affect influences
adaptive control in systematic ways. These findings are
consistent with theories proposing that positive affect
induces a more lenient and flexible processing style.
Moreover, our data suggests that affect modulates activity
in brain areas underlying conflict detection and adaptation.
We propose that the mesolimbic dopamine system mediates
this modulation.
H28
FACIAL FEAR ATTENUATES THE ERP OLD/NEW
EFFECT Jan W. Van Strien, EAN lab Rotterdam; Liselotte
Gootjes, EAN lab Rotterdam; Sandra J.E. Langeslag, EAN lab
Rotterdam; Ingmar H.A. Franken, EAN lab Rotterdam – The
ERP old/new effect typically comprises an earlier N400related component and a late positive component (LPC),
reflecting familiarity and recollection, respectively. Here we
examined the influence of fearful vs. neutral facial
expressions on these components. Twenty participants
(mean age = 20.8 years) viewed 30 fearful and 30 neutral
faces, with each face representing a different person. In a

H30
HOW EMOTIONAL AROUSAL LEADS TO SELECTIVE
MEMORY IN AGING: FMRI EVIDENCE Jill D. Waring,
Department of Psychology, Boston College; Elizabeth A.
Kensinger, Department of Psychology, Boston College, Athinoula
A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging – Attention is often
attracted by emotional stimuli, improving memory for those

38

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

details at the cost of memory for peripheral information.
This effect is called an emotion-induced memory trade-off.
In an event-related fMRI study, we showed young and older
adults scenes containing highly arousing, less arousing, and
neutral items placed upon neutral backgrounds. Analysis of
the subsequently remembered items and backgrounds from
scenes showed that both young and older adults
demonstrate a trade-off for highly arousing and less
arousing emotional scenes. Closer examination of the
neural activity corresponding with the trade-off revealed a
less coherent network of activation present in older adults
than young adults. Whereas in young adults the trade-off
for highly arousing scenes corresponded with a broad
network of affective processing regions, as well as frontotemporal areas associated with focused attention upon
visual details, older adults instead showed activation in a
more limited set of limbic and temporal lobe areas.
Although these whole-brain analyses suggest that there are
many age group differences in activation patterns associated
with the trade-off effect, region-of-interest analyses revealed
that several regions have similar activation patterns in
young and older adults, including portions of the amygdala
and temporal pole. These results indicate that although
older adults have a generally less coherent network of brain
regions associated with the trade-off effect than young
adults, many of the same key regions implicated in the
trade-off effect in young adults continue to be active in older
adults.

slow elaborative process that is better captured by the
duration than by the peak of neural activity.
H32
EMOTION
REGULATION
AND
COGNITIVE
CONTROL
PRESERVE
LEARNING
UNDER
STEREOTYPE THREAT Ronald C. Whiteman, The City
College of New York, CUNY; Catherine Good, Baruch College,
CUNY; Carol Dweck, Stanford University; Jennifer A. Mangels,
Baruch College, CUNY – Research on stereotype threat (ST)
reveals that women’s math performance may suffer when
tasks are presented as diagnostic and gender is made salient
because worry about fulfilling the stereotype absorbs
working memory resources. Less is known, however, about
how these affective responses influence learning processes
that could support remediation of performance errors. Here,
we took advantage of the neuromonitoring afforded by
ERPs to assess females’ affective appraisal of negative
performance feedback on a challenging math test and their
engagement with tutorial opportunities that could support
error correction on a later surprise retest. We divided our
subjects into better and poorer learners based on a post-hoc
median split of error correction to determine if different
processes supported effective learning under ST and nonthreat (NT) conditions. Overall, better learners exhibited
reduced affective processing of negative feedback, as
indexed by the Late Positive Potential (LPP), a waveform
associated with attention to arousing stimuli. However, the
LPP of better learners under ST was reduced further
compared to better learners under NT, suggesting
additional down-regulation of the affective response.
During preparation to receive the math tutor, better learners
exhibited posterior slow wave activity indicative of a
reorienting of attention toward the learning opportunity.
Under ST, this was coupled with greater anterior activity
suggesting engagement was more effortful compared to NT.
Taken together, these data suggest that when exposed to ST,
down-regulating negative emotional responses to errors and
up-regulating cognitive processing of learning opportunities
may be even more critical for rebound from failure than
under NT.

H31
THE NEURAL TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF THE
INTENSITY OF EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE Christian E.
Waugh, Stanford University; J. Paul Hamilton, Stanford
University; Ian H. Gotlib, Stanford University – In contrast to
‘core’ emotional processing, which is fast and involves the
reflexive assessment of the valence and salience of
emotional events, ‘elaborative’ emotional processing is slow
and involves the reflective deliberation of the self-relevance
and importance of an emotional event. We hypothesized
that more intense emotional experiences would invoke the
slow ‘elaborative’ assessment of the self-relevance of
emotional events and, consequently, would be characterized
by greater width of activation in brain regions along the
cortical midline associated with self-relevant processing.
Participants rated the intensity of their emotional responses
to emotional and neutral pictures. We used inverse logit
modeling to estimate separately the height, time-to-peak
and width of the BOLD responses to the stimuli. Supporting
our hypothesis, we found greater negative emotional
intensity to be associated with greater width of activation in
the rostral medial prefrontal cortex (rMPFC) and the
posterior cingulate cortex. Importantly, the rMPFC did not
also show differences in activation height, suggesting that
its role is primarily to deliberate on, but not to generate,
emotional experiences. These are the first data exploring the
temporal dynamics of emotional processing; they suggest
that assessing the intensity of an emotional event may be a

H33
HOW DO WE PERCEIVE THE PAIN OF IN-GROUP
AND OUT-GROUP MEMBERS? IMPLICIT VS.
EXPLICIT PROCESSING Reem Yahya, Department of Social
Psychology, University of Haifa, Israel; Ramzi Suleiman,
Department of Social Psychology, University of Haifa, Israel;
Simone S. Tsoory, Department of Social Psychology, University of
Haifa, Israel; Jean Decety, Department of Neuropsychology,
University of Haifa, Israel; Daniella Pery, Department of Social
Psychology, University of Haifa, Israel – Neuroimaging studies
indicate that the perception of pain in others can be
modulated by motivational factors and social relationships.
Within the context of social categorisation, however, such
modulation in perceived pain are still poorly understood,
and explored. In the present preliminary study we
examined how unconscious and conscious ethnic social

39

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

categorization of others affects the pain empathy. To meet
this aim, we assessed perceived pain when Jewish and Arab
participants viewed a series of pictures showing right hands
and right feet in painful and non-painful situations. The
pictures were associated with explicitly or subliminally
primed typical names depicting ingroup, outgroup or
control group. Results show incongruity between the
implicit and explicit levels of processing, which indicates
that pain perception is differently influenced when social
factors are processed consciously as opposed to
unconsciously. Pain ratings in the explicit priming provide
support for the ingroup empathy hypothesis in which
greater pain ratings were apparent when viewing ingroup
pictures. In contrast, implicit priming data showed an
interesting pattern in Jewish subjects where pictures of pain
were rated higher for the outgroup members. This suggests
that an inherent threat value of pain may have taken place
in the processing of the pain from a potential threatening
other, which leads to an unconscious automatic increase in
anxiety, and hence higher ratings of pain. These findings are
consistent with the notion that pain processing relies on two
dissociable dimensions: the inherent threat value and an
empathic prosocial concern. Finally, overall ratings of pain
were significantly greater in the eyes of Arab subjects
beyond ethnic differences and priming conditions. This
study may shed light on cultural differences in the
perception and processing of pain.

emotion regulation only showed in “reinterpretation”
condition. The same effect showed on EKG data. The heartrate significantly decreased in “reinterpretation” condition
during 2.5 to 3.5 sec post stimuli while comparing with that
in the viewing condition. For eye movement pattern,
subjects spent more time on the emotion areas in “distance”
and “reinterpretation” condition, but less in “distraction”
condition, comparing with the “viewing” condition. In
summary, the EKG data support the emotion regulation
effect on self-rating arousal level. On the other hand, eyemovement data showed different pattern across the emotion
regulation strategies.
H35
SO CLOSE AND SO MUCH INVESTED: GOAL
PROXIMITY
AND
SUNK
EFFORT
ESCALATE
FRUSTRATION Rongjun Yu, MRC-Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK; Dean Mobbs, MRC-Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK; Ben Seymour,
Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College
London, UK; James Rowe, MRC-Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit, Cambridge, UK; Andrew J Calder, MRC-Cognition and
Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK – Frustration aggression
theory states that frustration, elicited by the unfulfilled
appetitive motivation to attain a reward or goal, is an
antecedent to aggression. It has been hypothesized that the
amount of frustration is a function of the strength of the
desire to obtain the goal. Previous studies suggest that
motivation increases with increasing proximity to the goal,
the ‘goal gradience effect,’ and with the amount of prior
expenditure in resources or effort, known as the 'sunk cost
effect'. Given the hypothesized link between motivation and
frustration, we theorized that the closer one is to a goal, and
the larger the effort expended on the goal, the stronger the
motivation to reach it, and subsequently the stronger the
frustration after goal blockage. We designed a functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment to assess
how reward proximity and expended effort affect the
motivation to obtain the reward and the frustration when
the reward is blocked. As hypothesized, the self reported
motivation to obtain the reward and the frustration after
reward blockage were enhanced with increasing reward
proximity and effort. Our preliminary fMRI results show
that increasing motivation was associated with the
activation in ventral striatum and caudate. As the reward
blockage occurred closer to the final goal, brain activity in
amygdala increased while activity in vmPFC decreased.
Failure to inhibit the aversive emotion induced by unmet
desire may underlie the frustration-evoked aggression.

H34
EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT REGULATION STRATEGIES
FOR PICTURE-INDUCED NEGATIVE EMOTION ON
EYE-MOVEMENT
PATTERN
AND
PSYCHOPHSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES Nai-Shing Yen,
Department of Psychology, National Chengchi University; ChunYu Chen, Department of Psychology, National Chengchi
University; Cheng-Ching Han, Department of Psychology,
National Chengchi University; Chang-Hao Kao, Department of
Psychology, National Chengchi University; Kuan-Hua Chen,
Department of Psychology, National Chengchi University – The
aim of current study is to investigate the effects of different
strategies of emotion regulation on eye-movement pattern
and psychophysiological responses. Subject’s emotion was
elicited by presenting negative pictures from IAPS. Four
emotion regulation strategies were manipulated by
presenting different instructions (distraction, distance,
reinterpretation, and viewing). In “distraction”, “distance,”
and “reinterpretation” condition, subjects were instructed to
reduce the negative emotion by being absent-minded
toward the presenting pictures, pretending themselves as
scholars who were viewing the pictures for research
purpose, or reinterpreting the negative pictures,
respectively. Eye-movement pattern, EKG, SCR and selfrated valence and arousal of the emotion after regulation
were collected. On self-rated valence, the effects of emotion
regulation were shown in all three emotion regulation
strategies. That is, subjects reported more negative emotion
in viewing condition than those in the emotion regulation
conditions. On self-reported arousal level, the effect of

H36
PRIOR SOCIAL INTERACTIONS MODULATE TRUST
DECISIONS AND REWARD LEARNING IN THE
STRIATUM D.S. Fareri, Psychology Department, Rutgers
University; M.A. Niznikiewicz, Psychology Department, Rutgers
University; M.R. Delgado, Psychology Department, Rutgers
University – Previous research suggests that social
expectations formed from explicit instruction (reading a bio)

40

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

influence neural mechanisms of reward learning. It is
unknown, however, if expectations acquired by experience
will also affect reward mechanisms. The goal of this
experiment is to investigate how experience shapes social
expectations and influences the neural circuitry of rewardrelated learning. Participants played computerized ball
tossing games with three fictional characters, whose
personalities were manipulated to be ‘good’ (always
throwing to participant, and not a control character), ‘bad’
(never throwing to participant, but solely to the control), or
‘neutral’ (throwing equally to participant and the control).
In a subsequent economic trust game, participants could
keep or share (e.g., exhibiting trust) a given amount of
money with each character; sharing afforded potential
reciprocation (reward) or defection (punishment) of trust by
the character. Unbeknownst to participants, all characters
reinforce at the same rate (50%). Initial results indicate
participants were biased by their acquired social
expectations, exhibiting higher sharing rates with the good
compared to the bad character, and were slow to update
their decisions based on immediate positive or negative
feedback. Preliminary neuroimaging analysis suggests
greater sensitivity to positive and negative outcomes in the
striatum during trust exchanges with the neutral character
(no biases existed) in contrast to when social expectations
were present (e.g., good character). Further analysis will
probe how expectations acquired via social interactions
modulate both decision and outcome phases of the trust
game.

that loss- and gain-related processing may be mediated by
separate and distinct cortical circuits.
H38
REGULATORY FOCUS MODULATES REWARDRELATED NEURAL ACTIVITY IN ANTERIOR
ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX Samantha M. Mowrer, The
Ohio State University; Andrew A. Jahn, The Ohio State
University; William A. Cunningham, The Ohio State University
– Reward and motivation are inherently intertwined.
Although motivation is often reward-based, specific
motivational states can also impact valuation and reward
seeking. Thus, motivation may serve as an organizing
principle,
dynamically
shaping
the
perception,
interpretation, and experience of rewards in the service of
goal-directed activity. Using fMRI, the current study
examined how regulatory focus, a motivational principle
strongly coupled with reward, impacted neural reward
processing. Participants were randomly assigned to
promotion or prevention focus and then completed a
reaction time task in which they could experience successful
and unsuccessful outcomes of stimuli representing potential
gains and losses. Results showed regulatory focus
modulated activation in a region of anterior but not
posterior orbitofrontal cortex (OFC). Whereas posterior OFC
responded to potentially rewarding stimuli, anterior OFC
was sensitive to rewarding outcomes and regulatory focus.
Specifically, promotion focus enhanced responsivity to
successful outcomes in this region. Results are consistent
with hypotheses suggesting posterior OFC generates
computations of stimulus value, while more anterior
regions integrate contextual and motivational information
to provide a more nuanced valuation signal. The observed
data may be due to promotion focus generally enhancing
neural sensitivity to rewards or due to regulatory fit. That is,
the current task may have induced regulatory fit for
promotion but not prevention, thus resulting in increased
reward responsivity of OFC only for promotion focus.
Overall, these effects suggest motivation impacts reward
processing in important ways, potentially directing
subsequent processing in a top-down manner and giving
rise to distinct behavioral outputs and subjective
experiences.

H37
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY
DURING
THE
REWARD PROCESSING: THETA COHERENCE IN A
GAMBLING TASK Chella Kamarajan, SUNY Downstate
Medical Center; David Chorlian, SUNY Downstate Medical
Center; Madhavi Rangaswamy, SUNY Downstate Medical
Center; Ashwini K. Pandey, SUNY Downstate Medical Center;
Roopesh B. Nagaraj, SUNY Downstate Medical Center; Ramotse
Saunders, SUNY Downstate Medical Center; Niklas Manz,
SUNY Downstate Medical Center; Bernice Porjesz, SUNY
Downstate Medical Center – The outcome related negativity
(ORN), an event-related potential (ERP) component around
200-250
ms,
has
been
suggested
to
be
an
electrophysiological brain signature for the processing of
loss and gain. This component has been suggested to
involve theta band oscillations as a primary feature. The aim
of the current study is to examine the nature of functional
connectivity across brain regions during the processing of
monetary loss and gain. The sample consisted of 38 healthy
individuals with the age range of 18-35 years. A 64-channel
EEG was recorded continuously while the subjects were
performing a gambling task that prompted the subject to
select one of two amounts, 10 and 50. Four possible
outcomes (+50, +10, -50, -10) were analyzed using a Wavelet
coherence method for the theta band from electrodes within
the frontal, central, temporal and parietal regions.
Coherence values were plotted and compared across all four
outcomes. The preliminary results tend to confirm the view

H39
TRACKING THE MECHANISMS OF AVOIDANCE
AND APPROACH LEARNING IN THE HUMAN BRAIN
M. A. Niznikiewicz, Psychology Department, Rutgers University;
M. R. Delgado, Psychology Department, Rutgers University –
The human striatum has been previously implicated in the
processing of positive reinforcement, but less is known
about its role in processing negative reinforcement. In this
experiment, participants learn specific approach or avoid
responses, mediated by positive and negative reinforcers
respectively, to investigate how both reinforcers are
processed in the human striatum. The experimental task
was divided into two discrete blocks, where participants
could either earn monetary rewards (Approach Block) or

41

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

Peter Muris, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Institute of
Psychology – Reward, such as monetary gain, and
punishment, such as monetary loss, are capable of
modifying the electrophysiological signals of the brain.
Further, it is known that there are individual differences in
the sensitivity for reward and punishment. This study set
out to test the relationship between self-reported sensitivity
to reward and sensitivity to punishment and
electrophysiological brain responses to monetary gains and
losses. Subjects filled out the modified BIS/BAS scales for
measuring
responsiveness
to
reward
(RR)
and
responsiveness to punishment (RP), and performed a
gambling task. The results showed that there was a
significant positive correlation between scores on the RR
scale and levels of brain activity in the early (200-300 ms)
interval in response to large reward trials, but also in
response to large punishment trials. There was no
significant correlation however, between scores on the RP
scale and the ERP components on punishment trials. Thus
individuals scoring high on RR seem to be generally more
sensitive initially to outcomes (either positive or negative)
during a task where they might receive a reward.
Keywords: modified BIS/BAS scales, responsiveness to
reward and punishment, monetary gambling task, ERP

avoid monetary punishments (Avoid Block) based on
successful learning.
Specifically, a conditioned cue
predicted the chance to win or avoid losing money
contingent on a correct button press (Pre-learning trials),
which upon learning led to the delivery of rewards or
termination of punishments (post-learning trials). Thus, this
design varied type of reinforcement between blocks
(positive vs. negative reinforcers) and time of learning (pre
and post learning). Skin conductance responses (SCRs) and
subjective ratings confirm a learning effect (i.e., greater
SCRs pre vs. post learning) and valence of reinforcement
(greater rating for stimuli that predicted positive vs.
negative outcomes). Preliminary neuroimaging results
indicate the striatum is involved in actively learning
through reinforcement, regardless of its valence, with
greater responses during pre compared to post trials.
However, greater BOLD signals were observed during
Avoid compared to Approach blocks, highlighting the
potential influence of negative reinforcers on motivated
behavior and reinforcement learning circuitry in humans.
H40
LOW SELF-ESTEEM BIASES NEURAL RESPONSES TO
EVALUATIVE SOCIAL FEEDBACK Leah H. Somerville,
Weill Cornell Medical College, Dartmouth College; Todd F.
Heatherton, Dartmouth College; William M. Kelley, Dartmouth
College – Self-esteem is a facet of personality that influences
our perception of social standing and modulates the salience
of social acceptance and rejection cues. In this experiment,
we sought to test whether self-esteem may act as a mediator
of neural responsivity to positive and negative evaluative
social feedback. Participants (n=42) engaged in a social
evaluation task whereby they received ostensible social
feedback from peers during fMRI scanning. Self-esteem
modulated behavioral responses to the task such that high
self-esteem individuals significantly overestimated the
percent of positive feedback they received. Brain imaging
analyses demonstrated that individuals with low selfesteem showed enhanced differential activity in the ventral
anterior cingulate/medial prefrontal cortex to positive
relative to negative social feedback. Follow-up voxelwise
analyses revealed that individuals with lower self-esteem
also recruited a greater spatial extent of activation within
the medial prefrontal cortex while coding the valence of
social feedback. These findings suggest an enhancement in
neural representation of affective properties of social
feedback in low self-esteem individuals, consistent with the
tendency for low self-esteem individuals to engage in
enhanced monitoring of environmental signals of social
inclusion and exclusion.

H42
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATE OF THE SUBJECTIVE
EXPERIENCE OF ANXIETY Barry H. Cohen, New York
University – More than eighty years ago, Cannon (1927)
posited that the most defining aspects of the subjective
experience of the various emotions arise directly from
neural activity in the thalamus that projects to, and
produces activation in, the neocortex. In more recent times,
the neural origins of the most basic emotions have been
identified principally with subcortical structures other than
the thalamus. However, there is one form of emotional
experience for which parts of the thalamus seem uniquely
suited to generate, and that is the subjective experience of
anxiety. Specifically, the organization of the midline and
intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus and their projections to
areas in the prefrontal cortex conform well to the neural
substrate that could be expected to underlie the subjective
aspects of anxiety. In this poster, I describe key elements of
the phenomenology of anxiety, distinguishing this feeling
state from related experiences, such as fear. Then, I
summarize the current state of knowledge concerning the
functional neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of the
midline thalamic nuclei with special attention paid to the
mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus and its projection to
the orbitofrontal cortex. I argue that the highest levels of the
Ascending Reticular Activating System contain exactly the
structure and functional capacities that are needed to
account for both normal and pathological levels of
subjective anxiety, as well as for the physiological,
behavioral, and cognitive consequences often associated
with episodes of anxiety.

H41
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SENSITIVITY TO
REWARD
ARE
ASSOCIATED
WITH
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
RESPONSES
TO
MONETARY GAINS AND LOSSES Ivo van den Berg,
Erasmus University Rotterdam, Institute of Psychology; Ingmar
Franken, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Institute of Psychology;

42

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

H43
AN FMRI STUDY ON ATTENTIONAL BIAS IN
INDIVIDUALS
AT
RISK
FOR
DEVELOPING
DEPRESSION Katarina Dedovic, Department of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, Douglas Mental Health University Institute,
Montreal, QC, Canada; Annie Duchesne, Department of
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada; Sonja Damika Lue, Department
of Psychiatry, Douglas Mental Health University Institute,
Montreal, QC, Canada; Julie Andrews, Department of Neurology
and Neurosurgery, Douglas Mental Health University Institute,
Montreal, QC, Canada; Simona Efanov, Department of
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada; Veronika Engert, Department
of Psychiatry, Douglas Mental Health University Institute,
Montreal, QC, Canada; Thomas Beaudry, Department of
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada; Ashley Ortega, Department of
Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Jens C.
Pruessner, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Douglas
Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada –
Depressed individuals display a maladaptive attentional
bias. Depressed individuals exhibit hypoactivity in the
prefrontal cortex (PFC). These phenomena may be linked to
vulnerability for developing depression. However, no
studies have investigated neural correlates of attentional
bias in a population at high risk for developing depression,
but which has not yet reached clinical levels. Sixty four
(33M:34F) healthy university students were recruited. Based
on the scores on Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), the
subjects were assigned to either a control group (BDI<10) or
a subclinically depressed group (9<BDI<19). The
participants underwent three functional runs during which
they completed the classical dot-probe task adapted for
neuroimaging environment employing happy, sad and
neutral faces. Analysis (groupXgenderXbias) revealed a
biasXgroup interaction (F=4.04, p=.051), with the subclinical
group bias for happy faces being greater compared to
controls (F=4.23,p=.046). Contrasting happy-neutral within
the subclinical group revealed unique clusters in bilateral
putamen and dorsal ACC. Within controls, we observed
increased activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus(IFG),
and decreased activity in subgenual ACC and DMPFC.
Within controls, sad-neutral contrast revealed activation in
the right IFG, and DLPFC. Direct comparison between the
two groups did not reveal any significant differences. All
contrasts were thresholded for clusters t>Â±3.27, p=0.05
corrected. Bias toward happy faces in subclinical
individuals may represent a cognitive strategy to elude
clinical depression. This cognitive approach may be
subserved by the activity in the basal ganglia and dACC.
The involvement of IFG in empathy may be crucial for
understanding the bias pattern observed in the control
group.
H44
EMOTIONAL
SHORT-TERM

WITH HIGH NEUROTICISM Martina Di Simplicio,
Neuroscience Department, Psychiatry Section, University of
Siena, Siena, Italy and University Department of Psychiatry,
Warneford Hospital, Oxford, UK; Catherine Harmer, University
Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, Oxford, UK –
Recent studies have identified neural circuits underlying the
biases in emotional processing in high neuroticism. To
further investigate this, we have looked at the effects of
antidepressant administration on neural responses to facial
expressions and self-referential words. Methods: Forty
never-depressed highly neurotic subjects were randomized
to 20 mg/day citalopram versus placebo for 7 days, in a
double-blind, between-groups design. On the last day
functional MRI data were acquired with an event-related
design, while subjects performed a gender discrimination
task on fearful and happy facial expressions and a
categorization task with self-referential positive and
negative words. Results: First, citalopram increased the
activation to fearful versus happy faces of high intensity in
cortical and limbic areas including PFC and amygdala.
Citalopram also increased the response to happy versus
fearful faces of medium intensity in posterior cortical areas
including precuneus and fusiform gyrus. Moreover, on a
region of interest analysis over a parietal area previously
correlated to neuroticism scores, subjects on citalopram
presented decreased activation during categorization of selfreferential negative words compared to placebo (all
contrasts p<.050). Conclusions: Emotional processing in
high neurotic subjects can be modulated by antidepressant
administration. However, the neural responses to negative
and positive stimuli after antidepressant manipulation
appear to be different in a sample with vulnerable
personality compared to previous studies on healthy
volunteers. Further analysis are needed to verify whether
these results represent in fact neural abnormalities that
contribute to the development of psychopathology and that
can be reverted by treatment.
H45
THE DAT1 GENOTYPE IN EXECUTIVE DYSFUNCTION
IN ALEXITHYMIA Nancy S. Koven, Bates College; Leah H.
Carr, Bates College – Alexithymia is marked by difficulty
identifying and describing emotions. Although not a unique
clinical syndrome per se, alexithymia has been implicated in
numerous medical and psychiatric conditions. Previous
neuropsychological studies indicate frontal lobe impairment
in alexithymia, which suggests corresponding weaknesses
in executive functioning. However, little is known about the
genetic contributions to the cognitive components of
emotion disregulation in this population. Given that the
mesocortical pathway is responsible for innervating the
frontal lobe via dopaminergic neurons, the present study
sought to examine the relationship between dopaminerelated gene expression, executive functioning, and levels of
alexithymia traits. In this study, an unselected sample of
community participants completed a self-report survey of
alexithymia (Trait Meta Mood Scale), a broadband measure
of executive functioning (BRIEF-A), and standard

PROCESSING
MODULATION
BY
ANTIDEPRESSANTS IN SUBJECTS

43

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

Silveira, Fernando R. Santos, Joana B. Vieira, Pedro R. Almeida,
Fernando Barbosa, João Marques-Teixeira, University of Porto. –
Schizotypal personalities are characterized by a pervasive
pattern of social and interpersonal deficits with reduced
capacity for close relationships, eccentricities of behavior
and depressed mood, among other core or associated
features (DSM-IV-Tr). The P200 component elicited in
auditory oddball has been studied in patients with
schizophrenia, but such reports are scarce and their results
are conflicting. Schizotypy may be particularly useful in
exploring biological correlates of an underlying
schizophrenic predisposition, given that these subjects share
traits with patients with schizophrenia, although in a less
severe form, and are usually free from sources of
interference in ERP measures (e.g., medication,
hospitalization).
Twenty-nine subjects (age M=45.64;
SD=14.64; 17 male) were assessed with the reduced version
of the O-LIFE schizotypy scales and performed an auditory
oddball task while ERPs were recorded at 19 sites. Potentials
were averaged for frequent stimuli and P200 peak
amplitude and peak latency measures were obtained.
Subjects were divided in two groups according to their
overall schizotypy score (median cut, with the unassigned
case being randomly included in the high-schizotypy
group). Analysis of midline electrodes revealed significant
rank differences for P200 peak amplitude at Cz. The lowschizotypy group (Mdn=3.30) showed reduced P200
amplitude when compared with the high-schizotypy group
(Mdn=4.83), U=60.0, p=.05, r=-0.36. No other significant
differences were found. The present findings are in-line
with previous reports regarding reduced P200 amplitude to
frequent stimuli in schizophrenia, suggesting that the study
of schizotypy is important, not only in itself, but also to
further the understanding of the electrophysiology of
schizophrenia.

venipuncture in order to assess the 40 base-pair variable
number of tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism of the
dopamine transporter gene (DAT1). Analysis of variance
indicated that participants with the 9/10 genotype (n=47)
demonstrated weaker skills in cognitive flexibility and error
recognition and reported diminished clarity of emotion
relative to participants with the 9/9 genotype (n=66).
Results suggest a significant role of DAT expression within
the mesocortical dopaminergic pathway in aspects of
cognitive and emotional functioning.
H46
PERCEPTUAL
ENHANCEMENT
OF
AFFECTIVE
PICTURE PROCESSING IN ANHEDONIA Gwladys Rey,
CNRS USR 3246, CHU Pitie Salpitriere, Paris, France; Laurent
Lamalle, INSERM IFR1, Unite IRM 3T, CHU Michallon,
Grenoble, France; Alexandre Krainik, INSERM U836, Grenoble
Institut des Neuroscience, CHU Michallon, Grenoble, France;
Kenneth Knoblauch, INSERM U846, Stem cell and brain research
institute, Bron, France; Roland Jouvent; CNRS USR 3246, CHU
Pitie Salpitriere, Paris, France; Philippe Fossati, CNRS USR
3246, CHU Pitie Salpitriere, Paris, France; Stephanie Dubal,
CNRS USR 3246, CHU Pitie Salpitriere, Paris, France –
Affective stimuli enhanced activation in several regions of
the visual cortex. This perceptive amplification for
emotional information is related to the facilitated detection
of the emotional information. We used functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) to explore the effect of anhedonia
i.e. the loss of the capacity to experience pleasure, on the
processing of emotional information. Moreover, we
manipulated the visual contrast of the stimuli to explore the
effect of this stimulus characteristic on the processing of
emotional pictures. Ten control subjects and 10 non-clinical
anhedonic subjects were presented with positive and
neutral pictures at 20% and 100% of contrast in a 3T Bruker
scanner. The event-related design included two randomized
sequences of 120 stimuli and 30 null events presented for 1.5
sec and followed by a fixation point of 2 sec. Subjects judged
the pleasant character of the pictures on a 4-point rating
scale. Anhedonics rated positive pictures less pleasant than
controls. Anhedonic subjects displayed a more widespread
pattern of visual cortical activation than controls, especially
for positives pictures. Anhedonics also showed greater
activity in an attentional network involving frontal lateral
and dorsal cingulate anterior cortices, and lower activity in
cortical midline regions including the cortex prefrontal
medial, posterior cingulate, precuneus, and the pregenual
anterior cingulate cortex. The enhanced perceptual
amplification for emotional information in anhedonia may
be linked to an increase of attentional processing. In
addition, reduced activity of the default network suggests
that anhedonia is associated with deficits in emotional
appraisal and self-referencial processing.

H48
COGNITIVE STYLE PATTERNS IN INDIVIDUALS AT
HIGH FAMILIAL RISK FOR DEPRESSION Jamie L.
Skipper, Mount Sinai School of Medicine; William R. Taboas,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine; Dennis S. Charney, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine; Adriana Feder, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine – BACKGROUND: The hopelessness theory of
depression posits that an internal, stable, and global
attributional style for negative life events represents a premorbid cognitive style that contributes to the onset of major
depressive disorder (MDD). METHODS: Male and female
volunteers with no personal history of any Axis I disorders,
aged 18 to 35 years, were stratified into two groups based
on their family history of MDD. High-risk (HR) volunteers
(n =16) had at least one first-degree relative with earlyonset, recurrent MDD. Low-risk (LR) volunteers (n = 16)
had a negative family history of any Axis I disorders in firstdegree relatives. Participants were administered a modified
version of the Cognitive Style Questionnaire (CSQ). Mean
scores for each attributional style dimension were compared
in HR and LR groups using t-tests. Correlation coefficients
were calculated to determine the relationships between

H47
ASSOCIATION
BETWEEN
SCHIZOTYPY
AND
REDUCTION OF THE AUDITORY P200 EVENTRELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) COMPONENT Celeste

44

Sunday, October 11, 10:30 AM-12:00 PM

Poster Session H

these dimensions within each risk group. RESULTS: There
were no significant between-group differences in mean
internality, globality, and stability scores for positive or
negative life situations.
For negative life situations,
however, while there were significant moderate correlations
between the globality and stability dimensions within both
risk groups, only the HR group showed significant
moderate positive correlations between the internality and
globality dimensions (r = 0.59, p = 0.02), and between the
internality and stability dimensions (r = 0.54, p = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS:
This
particular
combination
of
attributional tendencies observed only in the HR group
supports the hopelessness theory of depression and may
represent a trait marker of risk for depression.
H49
PERCEIVED SOCIAL SUPPORT AND RISK FOR
MAJOR DEPRESSION William R. Taboas, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine; Jamie Skipper, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine; Dennis S. Charney, Mount Sinai School of Medicine;
Adriana Feder, Mount Sinai School of Medicine –
BACKGROUND: The relationship between major
depressive disorder (MDD) and lower perceived social
support has been well established, yet little is known about
perceived support in healthy, never-depressed individuals
at high familial risk for major depression.
METHODS:
Male and female volunteers with no personal history of any
Axis I disorders, aged 18 to 35 years, were stratified into two
groups based on their family history of MDD. High-risk
(HR) volunteers (n =16) had at least one first-degree relative
with early-onset, recurrent MDD. Low-risk (LR) volunteers
(n = 18) had a negative family history of any Axis I
disorders in first-degree relatives. Participants were
administered three subscales of the Interpersonal Support
Evaluation List (ISEL), measuring tangible support,
appraisal, and belonging, and the Social Network Index
(SNI), measuring participation in social relationships. Mean
scores for each scale and subscale in the HR and LR groups
were compared using t- tests. RESULTS: Mean total ISEL
(HR =31.3, LR = 33.8, p = 0.04) and mean belonging support
subscale (HR = 10.32, LR = 11.33, p = 0.045) scores were
significantly lower in the HR group than in the LR group.
There were no significant between-group differences in
mean tangible and appraisal support subscales, or in mean
SNI scores. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that
lower perceived social support (in particular about the
presence of others with whom to identify and socialize) but
not lower actual participation in social relationships might
be a risk factor for the development of MDD.

45

Index of Posters

Leclerc, Christina
Little, Marianne
Lombardo, Michael
Ma, Yina
Manera, Valeria
Marin, Marie-France
Martin, Laura
Masten, Carrie
McRae, Kateri
Mendoza, Saaid
Meyer, Meghan
Morelli, Sylvia
Morey, Rajendra
Mowrer, Samantha
Muscatell, Keely
Neta, Maital
Niznikiewicz, Michael
Packer, Dominic
Perry, Daniella
Pönkänen, Laura
Ratner, Kyle
Rey, Gwladys
Said, Christopher
Santos, Fernando
Satpute, Ajay
Schjoedt, Uffe
Shany-Ur, Tal
Sindi, Shireen
Skipper, Jamie L.
Somerville, Leah
Spunt, Robert
Stanley, Damian
Stanton, Steven
Taboas, Willliam R.
Tamagni, Corinne
Tamir, Diana
Van Bavel, Jay
Van Dam, Nicholas
Van den Berg, Ivo
Van Dillen, Lotte
Van Overwalle, Frank
Van Steenbergen, Henk
Van Strien, Jan
Verosky, Sara
Volman, Inge
Wagner, Dylan
Waring, Jill
Waugh, Christian
Whiteman, Ron
Yahya, Reem
Yen, Nai-Shing
Yu, Rongjun
Zebrowitz, Leslie

Alphabetical by Corresponding Author:
Andre, Marie-Christine
Antonenko, Olga
Atlas, Lauren
Banks, Sarah
Bartholow, D.
Bartz, Jennifer
Bedi, Gillinder
Bhattacharya, Swati
Campbell-Meiklejohn, Daniel
Castle, Elizabeth
Chammat, Mariam
Chang, Luke
Ciaramidaro, Angela
Cikara, Mina
Cohen, Barry H.
Coronel, Jason
De Bruijn, Ellen
de Rojas, Joaquin
Dedovic, Katarina
Di Simplicio, Martina
Dickter, Cheryl
Duchesne, Annie
Dvash, Jonathan
Ebner, Natalie
Ewbank, Michael
Falk, Emily
Fareri, Dominic
Fischer, Meytal
Freeman, Jonathan
Gootjes, Liselotte
Gozzi, Marta
Gupta, Rupa
Guroglu, Berna
Gutchess, Angela
Gutchess, Angela
Hartley, Catherine A.
He, Yi
Hoogendoorn, Claire
Hughes, Brent L.
Ibanez, Agustin
Inagaki, Tristen
Inzlicht, Michael
Juster, Robert-Paul
Kamarajan, Chella
Kana, Rajesh
Kaye, Jesse
Kober, Hedy
Koven, Nancy
Krummenacher, Peter
Kumar, Poornima
Langeslag, Sandra

E29
H1
E35
H2
H3
E36
H4
E8
E9
H5
H6
E10
E30
E1
H42
E11
E31
H7
H43
H44
E12
E37
E38
E13
E14
E15
H36
E39
E2
H8
E16
E17
E32
E3
E18
H9
E19
H10
H11
E20
H12
E4
E40
H37
H13
H14
E41
H45
E42
E43
H15

46

H16
E44
E33
E45
E21
E46
E47
E22
E48
E5
H17
E23
H18
H38
E49
H19
H39
H20
H21
E50
E6
H46
E51
H47
H22
E24
E34
E52
H48
H40
E53
H23
E54
H49
H24
E25
E7
H25
H41
H26
E26
H27
H28
E27
E55
H29
H30
H31
H32
H33
H34
H35
E28

