Social & Affective Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting 2008
June 6-8, Westin Copley Place
Boston, MA

Organizing Committee
Jason Mitchell, Harvard Universit y
David Amodio, Ne w York Universit y
Jennifer Beer, Universit y of Texas, Austin
Wil Cunningham, The Ohio State Universit y
Matthe w Lieberman, Universit y of California, Los Angeles
Kevin Ochsner, Columbia Universit y

Schedule-at-a-glance
Friday, June 6
3:00 PM

Registration opens

5:00-6:30 PM

Session A (Keynote address)

6:30-8:00 PM

Reception

Saturday, June 7
8:00 – 9:00 AM

Continental breakfast

9:00 – 10:40 AM

Session B

10:40 – 11:10 AM

Coffee break

11:10 – 12:30 PM

Session C

12:30 – 2:30 PM

Break

2:30 – 4:10 PM

Session D

4:10 – 5:30 PM

Session E (Posters)

5:30 – 6:30 PM

Session F (Keynote address)

Sunday, June 8
8:00 – 9:00 AM

Continental breakfast

9:00 – 10:40 AM

Session G

10:40 – 12:00 PM

Session H (Posters)

12:00 – 1:30 PM

Break

1:30 – 3:15 PM

Session I

2

Presentations
session A

Keynote Address
Friday, June 6, 2008
5:30 PM – 6:30 PM
Chris Frith, University College London

“Social cognition: The group versus the individual”

session B

Person Perception
Saturday, June 7, 2008
9:00 - 10:40 AM
Frank Van Overwalle, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Jeff Cooper, Stanford University
Ulrike Rimmele, New York University; University of Zürich
Alex Todorov, Princeton University

ABSTRACTS
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL TIME COURSE AND BRAIN AREAS OF SPONTANEOUS AND
INTENTIONAL TRAIT AND GOAL INFERENCES Frank Van Overwalle, Marijke Van Duynslaeger and
Laurens Van der Cruyssen; Vrije Universiteit Brussel – Two studies measured event-related potentials
during spontaneous and intentional trait and goal inferences. Participants read sentences describing the
behavior of a target person from which a strong trait or goal could be inferred. The last word of a
sentence determined the consistency with the inference (trait or goal) implied in the preceding
sentences. In comparison with behaviors that were consistent with the implied inference, a positive
waveform was obtained when the behaviors were inconsistent with the inference, starting at 200 ms for
goals (P200) and 600 ms for traits (P300). This indicates that goals were inferred rapidly and
automatically while reading the behaviors, while traits were inferred more slowly and deliberately,
although irrespective of the participants' spontaneous or intentional instructions. In contrast, source
localization (LORETA) of the event-related potentials suggests that spontaneous inferences show
greater activation in the right temporo-parietal junction (rTPJ), whereas intentional inferences recruit
the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) more. Interestingly, during automatic goal identification (~225
ms), the rTPJ dominated brain activation, whereas this was not the case for trait inferences (~600 ms).
Memory measures taken after the presentation of the stimulus material involved sentence completion
and trait-cued recall, and supported the occurrence of trait and goal inferences. They also showed
significant correlations with the neural components (i.e., P200, P300 and the LORETA activation in the
rTPJ and mPFC), indicating that these components are valid neural indices of spontaneous inferences.
LEARNING TO LIKE: SOCIAL OBSERVATION INFLUENCES PREFRONTAL ACTIVATION FOR
VIEWING OTHERS Jeffrey C. Cooper, Tamar Kreps, Brian Knutson (all Department of Psychology, Stanford
University – How do people learn who to like? Behavioral observation provides one important source
of information. Often, people make enduring positive and negative judgments of others based on
limited observation. Little is known, though, about how the brain builds positive or negative social
impressions on the basis of observation. We scanned participants with event-related FMRI in a novel
social prediction task in which participants observed the outcomes of an earlier six-person repeated
public goods game and made predictions about how much was donated on each round. Participants

3

were not told in advance that the donation profiles of each player in the game were designed to be more
or less altruistic. Participants were accurate at estimating each player's average donation, and formed
strong impressions of each player. After observation, altruistic players were judged to be more likeable
and trustworthy, while selfish players were judged to be less likeable and trustworthy. Preliminary
analysis indicated that viewing the faces of altruistic players (vs. selfish players) activated medial
orbitofrontal cortex and anterior medial prefrontal cortex. Feedback for predictions about altruistic
players (vs. selfish players) also elicited differential activation of ventral medial prefrontal cortex. This
study is among the first to examine how observation changes both emotional impressions of others and
neural responses to them. These results are consistent with recent research indicating that positive
social outcomes may be processed in the brain like other types of rewards -- simply viewing others we
like may constitute a positive outcome.
OXYTOCIN DECREASES RATINGS OF TRUSTWORTHINESS FOR HIGHLY TRUSTWORTHY
FACES Ulrike Rimmele, Department of Psychology, New York University and Department of Psychology,
University of Zürich, Switzerland; Peter Klaver, MR Center, University Children's Hospital Zürich and
Department of Psychology, University of Zürich; Michael Kosfeld, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics,
University of Zürich; Kai Lutz, Department of Psychology, University of Zürich; Markus Heinrichs, Department
of Psychology, University of Zürich – Successful social interaction depends on accurate social judgment.
The neuropeptide oxytocin that plays a central role in social approach behaviour in non-human
mammals, improves mind-reading and increases trust in humans. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled
between-subjects design (N=32 healthy males), we investigated whether intranasally administered
oxytocin influences judgments of trustworthiness for male faces. Compared to placebo, oxytocintreated subjects, unexpectedly, showed a significant decrease in trustworthiness ratings for faces that
according to a pilot study expressed high trustworthiness. In contrast, ratings for faces expressing low
trustworthiness were comparable between oxytocin and placebo conditions. In a follow-up study (N=30
healthy males), we could show that the decrease in trustworthiness ratings of oxytocin subjects was
related to specific facial features. Our finding suggests that the decrease in trustworthiness ratings is a
consequence of oxytocin-induced increased sensitivity to facial expression.
THE NEURAL BASIS OF FACE EVALUATION Alexander Todorov, Nikolaas Oosterhof, Andrew Engell,
Chris Said, Center for the Study of Brain, Mind and Behavior, Princeton University – People automatically
evaluate faces on multiple trait dimensions and these evaluations predict important social outcomes
ranging from electoral success to sentencing decisions. Based on behavioral studies and computer
modeling, we identify two orthogonal dimensions - valence and dominance - that underlie evaluation
of emotionally neutral faces and show that a) these dimensions can be approximated by judgments of
trustworthiness and dominance; b) whereas the valence dimension is sensitive to features resembling
expressions signaling approach/ avoidance behavior, the dominance dimension is sensitive to features
signaling physical strength/ weakness; and c) judgments such as threat can be reproduced as a function
of these two dimensions. The findings suggest that face evaluation is an overgeneralization of adaptive
mechanisms for inferring harmful intentions and the ability to cause harm. In a series of functional
neuroimaging studies, we investigate the neural basis of face evaluation. We find that valence
evaluation of faces involves the amygdala and inferotemporal cortex. We are currently investigating the
neural basis of dominance evaluation.

session C

Stereotyping and prejudce
Saturday, June 7, 2008
11:10 AM - 12:30 PM
Cheryl Dickter, Union College
Jay Van Bavel, The Ohio State University
David Amodio, New York University
Naomi Eisenberger, University of California, Los Angeles

4

ABSTRACTS
ATTENTION TO RACE AND GENDER IN SOCIAL CATEGORIZATION Cheryl Dickter, Union
College; Bruce Bartholow, University of Missouri-Columbia – Recent electrophysiological research indicates
that perceivers differentiate individuals along social dimensions quickly, often within a few hundred
milliseconds. However, most categorization studies have been limited to White participants, neglecting
potential differences in processing between racial groups. Moreover, few studies have examined the
extent to which race interferes with categorization along other dimensions when race is made irrelevant
to a perceiver's task. A modified flanker task was used to test the extent to which race information
would implicitly interfere with explicit gender categorization. Participants identified the gender of
target faces, which were embedded among flanker faces presented simultaneously around the target
face. The flanker faces varied in compatibility with the target face on race and gender. Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were measured in order to examine early attention to race and gender information. As
predicted, behavioral and electrocortical data indicated that participants attended to both the taskrelevant gender dimension and the task-irrelevant race dimension, even when attending to race was
detrimental to their performance. Additionally, processing of target race differed between Black and
White participants as seen in the early attentional components of the ERP (i.e., N100, P200, N200). In
conclusion, this study indicated that perceivers are clearly aware of the multiple dimensions on which
targets can be categorized, and are influenced by the context in which categorization takes place.
Furthermore, this research suggests that the race of the perceiver may be more important than the race
of the target in the social categorization process.
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF INGROUP BIAS: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Jay J. Van Bavel,
The Ohio State University & University of Toronto; Dominic J. Packer, The Ohio State University; & William A.
Cunningham, The Ohio State University – Social psychological theory suggests that ingroup bias is
functional and motivates much of human social cognition. Indeed, a series of classic minimal group
studies have shown that mere categorization with a novel group is sufficient to evoke a range of
perceptual, affective, and behavioral ingroup biases. We randomly assigned participants to a mixedrace team and used fMRI to identify brain regions involved in processing novel ingroup and outgroup
members independent of pre-existing attitudes, stereotypes, or familiarity. Whereas previous research
on intergroup perception found amygdala activity to stigmatized social groups - typically interpreted
as negativity - we found greater amygdala, fusiform, orbitofrontal cortex, and dorsal striatum activity
when participants viewed novel ingroup relative to outgroup faces. Moreover, ingroup bias in
orbitofrontal cortex activity was correlated with self-reported preference for ingroup over outgroup
members. These ingroup biases in neural activity were not moderated by race or explicit attention to
team membership vs. race, suggesting that they occur relatively automatically. This study helps clarify
the role of neural substrates involved in perceptual and affective ingroup biases.
ROLE OF THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN THE REGULATION OF SOCIAL
RESPONSES David M. Amodio, New York University; Polina Potanina, New York University – Activity in
the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) has been associated with aspects of social cognition on a variety of
tasks. To date, interpretations of these activations have focused on processes of person perception and
impression formation, with less emphasis on links to social behavior. We proposed that the mPFC plays
an important role in self-regulation by integrating personal goals with perceived goals of others. We
tested this hypothesis in an fMRI study in which White American subjects made either interpersonal or
non-interpersonal judgments of people in conditions that did or did not require self-regulation. Subjects
viewed pairs of White and/or Black faces and judged which of the pair was more likely to be their
friend (an interpersonal judgment) or was more likely to be athletic (a stereotype-relevant impersonal
judgment). During mixed-race trials, there was potential for showing racial bias, and thus regulatory
concerns were present. When judging between same-race faces, these regulatory concerns were absent.
We found that regions of PFC and anterior cingulate were more highly activated for mixed-race vs.
same-race trials, consistent with the notion that thee trials elicits greater regulatory processing.
Importantly, within the mixed-race condition, mPFC activity was significantly stronger for
interpersonal (friendship) judgments than impersonal (trait) judgments. By contrast, impersonal (vs.
interpersonal) judgments were associated with activation in the right lateral PFC, a region often
implicated in inhibitory processes. Together, these findings suggest that the mPFC is involved in the
broader process of self-regulation, beyond researchers' extant focus on its role in person perception.

5

EXPERIENCING RACIAL DISCRIMINATION: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Naomi I. Eisenberger,
Carrie Masten, Eva Telzer, University of California, Los Angeles – Although previous research has examined
the neural correlates of racial bias, these investigations have focused exclusively on White's perceptions
of Black targets. To date, no work has examined the neural underpinnings of the experience of racial
discrimination, or being a target of racial bias. Experiencing racial discrimination is thought to be
"painful" and is hypothesized to contribute to the higher incidence of physical health problems among
African American individuals. Building on previous work showing that social exclusion activates some
of the same neural regions involved in the distressing experience of physical pain, we examined
whether experiencing racial discrimination is similarly painful, utilizing this underlying neural circuitry
as well. Both Black (n = 12) and White (n = 13) participants were scanned while being excluded from a
virtual ball-tossing game by two supposed White participants. Thus, Black and White participants were
always excluded by White individuals. Self-reports of social distress, attributions for the rejection
episode (e.g. "Were you rejected because of your race?"), and ratings of rejection sensitivity and racerelated rejection sensitivity were collected following scanning. Results revealed some similarities with
previous studies of social exclusion, as well as differences specific to experiences of perceived racial
discrimination. Implications for understanding the detrimental effects of discrimination as well as the
computational components of rejection experience will be discussed.

session D

Morality, deception, and trust
Saturday, June 7, 2008
2:30 PM – 4:10 PM
Kamila Sip, Aarhus University
Guiseppe di Pellegrino, University of Bologna
Andrea Glenn, University of Pennsylvania
Joshua Greene, Harvard University

ABSTRACTS
I THINK YOU ARE LYING TO ME NOW... DECEPTION AS CONTEXTUAL DECISION MAKING
Kamila E. Sip, Centre for Functionally Integrative Neuroscience (CFIN), Aarhus University Hospital, 8000
Aarhus, Denmark, Institute of Anthropology, Archaeology and Linguistics, University of Aarhus, Denmark;
Morten Lynge, Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University; William McGregor, Institute of
Anthropology, Archaeology and Linguistics, University of Aarhus, Denmar; Chris Frith, Wellcome Trust Center
for Neuroimaging, Functional Imaging Laboratory, University College London Andreas Roepstorff, Centre for
Functionally Integrative Neuroscience (CFIN), Aarhus University Hospital, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark, Institute of
Anthropology, Archaeology and Linguistics, University of Aarhus, Denmark – To investigate real-life
deceptive behavior, we need to be aware that deception draws on a number of cognitive processes that
are not by themselves deceptive. Also, in real-life deception, a lie is not simply the opposite of truth
because truth can be equally deceptive. To examine realistic deceptive interactions, we conducted an
fMRI study of a competitive, deceptive game. The subjects decided whether to lie or tell the truth based
on their own judgment and the state of the game. The game alternated between two aspects: (1) being
deceptive and (2) detect deception. 18 subjects underwent fMRI scanning in a Siemens Trio 3T MR.
TR=3sec, 35slices, whole-brain coverage, 5 x 5min sessions, 100volumes/session. Data analyzed with
SPM5. Deciding to tell the truth or a lie in a context of the potential to lie is processed differently from
deciding to tell the truth when there is no other option. In risky context, we found activation in BA 8
(p<0.05 corrected) implicated in management of uncertainty in decision-making. Yet, comparing a lie
and a truth respectively versus a no-risky truth suggests that lying is more cognitively demanding in
any context. When subjects decide to disbelieve their opponent, we found activity in dopaminergic and
insular structures including nucleus accumbens that have previously been implicated in processing
reward during trust and reciprocity games (p < 0.001 uncorrected). Our results demonstrate that

6

processings deception is highly context dependent and interrelate truth and lie in the contexts of trust,
mistrust, and risk taking.
INVESTMENT AND REPAYMENT IN A TRUST GAME AFTER VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL
DAMAGE Giovanna Moretto, Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, Italy; Giuseppe di Pellegrino,
Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, Italy – Although trust and reciprocity are ubiquitous in
social exchange, their neurobiological substrate remains largely unknown. Here, we investigated the
effect of damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) - a brain region critical for adaptive
social emotions - on individuals' decisions in a single-round trust game. In this game, one player, the
Investor, is endowed with a sum of money which she can keep or invest. The amount she decides to
invest is tripled and sent to the other player, the Trustee, who then decides what fraction to return to
the Investor. In separate games, six patients with focal bilateral damage to the vmPFC and control
participants made 12 decision while playing in the role of either Investor or Trustee with 12 different
anonymous counterparts in each game. A lottery game was also included in which the Investor faced
exactly the same decisions as in the Trust game, but a random device (e.g., a computer), not another
player, determined the final payoffs. Results showed that vmPFC patients invested significantly more
than control subjects in the trust game, whilst no difference was observed in the lottery game.
Furthermore, when acted as Trustee, vmPFC patients made lower back transfers toward Investors,
thereby showing less reciprocity behaviour. Taken together, these results indicate that social valuation
and emotion subserved by vmPFC have a critical role in trusting and reciprocity decisions. The findings
support the hypothesis that vmPFC damage may impair affective systems specifically designed for
mediating social transaction with other individuals.
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MORAL JUDGMENT IN PSYCHOPATHY Andrea L. Glenn,
University of Pennsylvania; Adrian Raine, University of Pennsylvania; Robert Schug, University of Southern
California – Recent brain imaging studies have begun to explore the neural correlates of moral
judgment, revealing that emotion-related brain regions are highly involved. However, psychopaths are
a unique subset of individuals characterized by immoral behavior and emotion-related deficits. A
recent review of brain imaging studies in psychopaths highlighted the point that psychopaths exhibit
deficits in many of the same brain regions that have been implicated in moral judgment (Raine & Yang,
2006). Using fMRI, this study examined brain functioning of psychopaths during moral decisionmaking by implementing a task involving moral dilemmas (e.g., the trolley problem) that has been used
in previous fMRI studies of moral judgment (Greene et al., 2001, 2004). While in the scanner, subjects
were presented with moral dilemmas, some of which are "personal" and more emotion-provoking, and
others which are "impersonal" and have been shown to involve more cognitive processing. Analyses
revealed that individuals who were more psychopathic exhibited less activation in emotion-related
brain regions that have previously been implicated in moral judgment during personal versus
impersonal moral dilemmas. These results suggest that the emotional component of moral decisionmaking may be less salient in psychopaths, which may lead to the immoral behavior observed in
psychopathy.
THE SECRET JOKE OF KANT'S SOUL Joshua D. Greene, Harvard University – According to utilitarian
philosophers like John Stuart Mill, morality is ultimately about promoting the "greater good."
According to deontological philosophers like Immanuel Kant, right and wrong is ultimately a matter of
respecting rights and fulfilling duties that may trump the greater good. Drawing on a range of studies,
both neuroscientific and behavioral, I will argue that the longstanding tension between utilitarian and
deontological philosophy ultimately reflects a more fundamental tension between separate, and in
some cases competing, systems in the brain. More specifically, I will argue that characteristically
deontological judgments are driven by intuitive emotional responses (based in the medial prefrontal
cortex, etc.) while characteristically consequentialist judgments are driven by more controlled cognitive
processes (based in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, etc.).

7

session F

Keynote Address
Saturday, June 7, 2008
5:30 PM – 6:30 PM
Tom Insel, National Institute of Mental Health

session G

The self in social cognition
Sunday, June 8, 2008
9:00 AM – 10:40 AM
Michael Lombardo, University of Cambridge
Stephanie Preston, University of Michigan
Joan Chiao, Northwestern University
Matthew Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles

ABSTRACTS
THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN THE MENTALIZING AND MIRROR NEURON SYSTEMS IN
REFLECTIVE REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE SELF AND OTHER Lombardo MV, Department of
Psychiatry, Autism Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Chakrabarti B,
Department of Psychiatry, Autism Research Centre, University of Cambridge; Sadek SA, Department of
Psychiatry, Autism Research Centre, University of Cambridge; Pasco G, Department of Psychiatry, Autism
Research Centre, University of Cambridge,; Wheelwright SJ, Department of Psychiatry, Autism Research Centre,
University of Cambridge,; Suckling JS, Department of Psychiatry, Brain Mapping Unit, University of
Cambridge; Bullmore ET, Department of Psychiatry, Brain Mapping Unit, University of Cambridge; & BaronCohen S, Department of Psychiatry, Autism Research Centre, University of Cambridge – Various types of prereflective representations of the self and others (e.g., touch, pain, disgust, perception-action) overlap
within the brain. It is unclear however, whether the neural systems involved in reflective
representations about the self and others also overlap. We tested 23 healthy male volunteers in a 2x2
factorially-designed 3T fMRI experiment in order to test whether reflective mentalizing or physical
judgments about the self or a familiar non-close other would recruit shared or distinct neural systems.
Parametric group level conjunction analyses showed that when asked to mentalize, there was self-other
overlap in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus (PCC),
and bilateral temporo-parietal junction (TPJ). Reflective physical representations about the self or other
recruited overlapping regions within the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), bilateral inferior
frontal gyrus/ventral premotor cortex (IFG/VPMC), and inferior parietal lobule (IPL). Our results
clearly show that the neural systems for reflective representations of the self and other are largely
overlapping. We discuss our results in relation to simulation theory and the possible integration of the
reflective mentalizing and mirror systems in simulating other's minds. In addition, we discuss how
understanding the overlapping neural systems for reflective self and other judgments is important in
understanding atypical populations where self- and other-referential cognition is impaired, such as
autism.
"I TOTALLY KNOW HOW YOU FEEL:" SIMILAR PAST EXPERIENCE MEDIATES THE
BEHAVIORAL, PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL AND NEURAL PROCESSES OF EMPATHY AND
HELPING Stephanie D. Preston, Department of Psychology, University of Michigan – Brain-imaging studies
consistently find overlapping activation for experiencing and observing emotional states. However,
these studies typically utilize commonly-experienced states like pain, which inadvertently discount a
defining feature of empathy - that many difficult problems are not shared by others and cannot
engender empathy (e.g. specific health conditions or interpersonal dynamics). We investigated the

8

correlates of empathy using real-life emotional experiences. Study 1 used [15O]H2O PET brain imaging
and found identical patterns of neural and autonomic activation when subjects relived a past
experience or imagined another's relatable experience. When subjects could not relate, autonomic
arousal decreased and the ventral temporal cortex was recruited. In study 2, we scanned participants
using 3T fMRI while they watched videos of patients discussing illness. High need in the patients did
not produce higher offers of help, but rather personal distress and negative emotion, associated with
anterior and medial emotion-processing regions (e.g. OFC, ACC, anterior insula, and hypothalamus).
Offers of help increased with levels of attention, emotion, empathy, and sympathy, which were
associated with more posterior and ventral regions (e.g. ITC, parahippocampal gyrus, and TPJ). In
study 3, the same paradigm was used to compare women with and without depression. Supporting the
need for common past experience, women with depression felt less negative emotion and more
empathy when the patient had high need, even when this led to personal distress. Future research
needs to focus on how neural representations for past experience are stored and retrieved to facilitate
empathy, paying particular attention to ventral temporal regions.
NEURAL BASIS OF INDIVIDUALISTIC AND COLLECTIVISTIC VIEWS OF SELF Joan Y. Chiao,
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University; Tokiko Harada, Department of Psychology, Northwestern
University; Hidetsugu Komeda, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan; Zhang Li,
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University; Yoko Mano, National Institute for Physiological Sciences,
Okazaki, Japan; Daisuke N. Saito, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan; Todd B. Parrish,
Department of Radiology, Northwestern University; Norihiro Sadato, National Institute for Physiological
Sciences, Okazaki, Japan;, Tetsuya Iidaka, Department of Psychiatry, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan –
Individualism and collectivism refer to a fundamental psychological dimension, called "self-construal
style", often used to explain differences in how individuals from Western and Eastern cultures construe
themselves and their relation to the world. Individualists perceive themselves as stable entities,
autonomous from other people and their environment, while collectivists view themselves as dynamic
entities, continually defined by their social context and relationships. Here we used functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) at 3T in two experiments examining the neural bases of individualism and
collectivism. In Experiment 1, we used cross-cultural neuroimaging to show that neural activity within
the anterior rostral portion of medial prefrontal cortex during general versus contextual self judgments
positively predicts how individualistic or collectivistic a person is across cultures. In Experiment 2,
bicultural individuals primed with either an individualistic or collectivistic orientation showed greater
activation within the anterior rostral portion of medial prefrontal cortex during general relative to
contextual self judgments, respectively. Our findings reveal two kinds of neural representations of the
self that vary as a function of self-construal style, and highlight the importance of culture in shaping
neurobiological mechanisms underlying self-relevant social cognition.
NEURAL BASES OF PERSUASION AND DISSONANCE-RELATED ATTITUDE CHANGE
Matthew Lieberman, Emily Falk, Johanna Jarcho, & Elliot Berkman, University of California, Los Angeles –
Attitude change and persuasion are fundamental topics within social psychology and yet the
neurocognitive mechanisms involved in these phenomena have gone largely unexplored. We will
present four social neuroscience studies that begin to elucidate these mechanisms. The first two studies
examine the neural bases of cognitive dissonance-induced attitude change using both
neuropsychological (study 1) and neuroimaging (study 2) methodologies. These studies indicate that
contrary to existing theories, dissonance-induced attitude change occurs in parallel with the
dissonance-inducing decision, rather than a significant time later, and that such attitude change does
not always depend on reflective/deliberative processing. The second set of studies examine the neural
bases of persuasion in which Americans (study 3) or Koreans (study 4) read persuasive arguments and
subsequently rated the persuasiveness of each argument. In both samples, persuasiveness was
positively associated with activity in theory of mind and memory encoding networks. Additionally, in
these studies and in the fMRI study of cognitive dissonance, activity in bilateral anterior insula was
negatively associated with the magnitude of attitude change.

9

session I

Self-regulation
Sunday, June 8, 2008
1:30 PM – 3:15 PM
Kateri McRae, Stanford University
Heather Urry, Tufts University
Christine Hooker, Harvard University
Marcia Johnson, Yale University

ABSTRACTS
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE COGNITIVE CONTROL OF EMOTION: COMPARING
COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL AND DISTRACTION Kateri McRae, Department of Psychology, Stanford
University; Brent Hughes, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin; Sita Chopra, Department
of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; John D.E. Gabrieli, Department of Brain
and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, James J. Gross, Department of Psychology,
Stanford University; and Kevin N. Ochsner, Department of Psychology, Columbia University – Distraction
and reappraisal are two forms of cognitive emotion regulation with proven experimental and clinical
efficacy. Recent imaging work has suggested that each strategy depends upon interactions between
affective appraisal and prefrontal control systems. Because no studies have directly compared them,
however, its remains unclear whether they have draw on different regulatory mechanisms that have
different emotional consequences. The present study provides the first direct comparison of the
behavioral and neural consequences of both strategies to down-regulate negative emotion. Whole-brain
BOLD signal was obtained from 17 women while alternating between cognitive reappraisal, distraction
and unregulated responding while viewing negative picture stimuli. Three key findings were obtained.
First, both strategies resulted in significant drops in self-reported negative affect and amygdala activity
and showed common recruitment of prefrontal and cingulate regions associated with cognitive control.
Second, effects on the two indices of emotional responding were not equivalent. Whereas reappraisal
resulted in greater down-regulation of self-reported negative emotion, distraction resulted in greater
down-regulation of amygdala activity. Third, greater activity during reappraisal was also observed in a
network of regions associated with meaning-based processing of emotional stimuli (medial prefrontal
and anterior temporal cortices). Greater activity during distraction was observed in a few regions
(prefrontal and parietal cortices) that are often implicated in the effortful direction of attention. Taken
together, these data support the view that reappraisal and distraction differentially depend upon
systems involved in cognitive reframing and attentional deployment. This conclusion has implications
for the appropriate context-dependent use of reappraisal and distraction.
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTION REGULATION: IMPLICATIONS FOR WELL-BEING
Heather L. Urry, Tufts University; Carien M. van Reekum, University of Reading; Tom Johnstone, University of
Reading; Ned H. Kalin, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Richard J. Davidson, University of WisconsinMadison – Much recent attention has been paid to pinpointing the neural and physiological correlates of
deliberate emotion regulation. While it is clear that people can voluntarily change how they feel, at least
to some extent, one question that must be raised is whether being able to purposefully modify affective
responses has predictive validity outside the laboratory. This talk will argue that it does, focusing on
the extent to which brain responses as participants deliberately decrease negative affect in response to
unpleasant pictures are associated with regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, a
system that mobilizes energy in stressful situations. Specifically, participants displaying higher signal in
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and lower signal in the amygdala when decreasing compared to simply
attending to negative emotion exhibit a more normative decline in cortisol over the course of the day.
This talk will also present findings indicating that brain function during volitional emotion regulation is
associated with normal variation in depressive symptoms, and that depressed individuals exhibit
different patterns of activation compared to healthy controls.

10

VENTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVITY TO EMOTIONAL CUES FROM
PARTNER PREDICTS ABILITY TO REGULATE MOOD AFTER AN INTERPERSONAL
CONFLICT Christine Hooker, Harvard University; Anett Gyurak, University of California at Berkeley; Sara
Verosky, Princeton University; Asako Miyakawa, University of California at Berkeley; Özlem Ayduk, University
of California at Berkeley – Failure to regulate emotional response after an interpersonal conflict can
precipitate depressed mood. Research has shown that the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC)
facilitates emotion regulation by controlling the intensity of emotional experience. Here we used fMRI
and daily-diary methods to investigate whether VLPFC activity to negative facial expressions from a
dating partner predicts the ability to regulate mood after an interpersonal conflict. Participants viewed
pictures of positive, negative, and neutral facial expressions of their dating partner and an opposite sex
stranger while undergoing an fMRI scan. In addition, participants completed a 21 day diary in which
they rated their mood and identified whether they had a conflict with their partner. We found that level
of VLPFC activity in response to negative emotional expressions of a dating partner was a significant
predictor of whether an interpersonal conflict resulted in a change in mood the next day. Specifically,
participants with low VLPFC activity in response to negative facial expressions of their dating partner
had an increase in negative mood following a conflict. We found the same pattern for VLPFC response
to positive facial expressions from the partner; those with low VLPFC activity reported more negative
mood after an interpersonal conflict. VLPFC activity in response to emotional expressions of the
stranger was not a significant predictor of change in mood after a conflict. The results suggest that
VLPFC activity to interpersonally relevant emotional stimuli reflects cognitive control capacity which
then predicts the ability to regulate mood after an interpersonal stressor.

11

Poster Session E
E1
EXCEPTIONAL FACE RECOGNITION ABILITY
Richard Russell, Harvard University; Garga Chatterjee,
Harvard University; Brad Duchaine, University College
London; Ken Nakayama, Harvard University – The ability to
recognize other people is fundamental to social cognition.
Faces provide a wealth of social information, and are the
primary means by which people are recognized. Recent
work has discovered that approximately 2% of the general
population has extreme difficulty recognizing faces, even
those of their closest family members. Following recent
media coverage of these 'developmental prosopagnosics',
several individuals contacted us to self-identify as being
the opposite of prosopagnosic-having significantly better
than ordinary face recognition ability. They describe their
face recognition abilities in strong terms, such as "...if I've
seen your face before I will be able to recall it. It happens
only with faces." We have tested four of these individuals.
On two tests of face recognition, they each received higher
scores than any other subject, collectively performing
three standard deviations above the mean. From these
results, we conclude that these individuals are indeed
much better than normal at recognizing faces. These
results also indicate that the range of individual variation
in the ability to recognize faces is much greater than
previously realized. This large range of ability allows us to
use individual differences methods to determine what
abilities and neural properties are associated or
dissociated with face recognition ability. To date, we have
found associations between face recognition ability and
general visual memory, as well as the ability perceive
differences between faces. Future work will investigate
possible associations between face recognition and other
cognitive, social, and affective abilities.
E2
A
NEURONAL
INVESTIGATION
OF
THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STEREOTYPE THREAT,
SELF-DOUBT
AND
THE
DISRUPTION
OF
ATTENTION
AND
MEMORY
ENCODING
PROCESSES Chad E. Forbes, University of Arizona; Toni
Schmader, University of Arizona; John J.B. Allen, University of
Arizona – Stereotype threat is thought to engender a
barrage of negative cognitions and emotions that may
interfere with one's ability to remain focused during a
performance situation. Little is known however about
how these processes may interfere with attention and
memory encoding processes during the performance
itself. The present study measured White and minority
students' EEG activity while receiving error induced
feedback on a response-conflict task described as either a
perceptual task or an intelligence task. Theta power was
isolated via wavelet analyses to provide an on-line
neuronal index of attention and encoding of error
feedback on the task. The relationship between theta and
self-reported error estimates, discounting, and self-doubt

was then examined. Results revealed that minorities under
stereotype threat demonstrated a significant decrease in
theta activity in response to errors compared to Whites in
both conditions and compared to minorities in the control
condition. This decrease in theta activity was significantly
correlated with an overestimation of errors made on the
supposed intelligence test. This relationship was not
present among Whites or minorities in the control
condition. In addition, error overestimations were also
associated with increased feelings of self-doubt among
minorities under threat and increased levels of
discounting among their White counterparts. These results
suggest that stereotype threat may interfere with one's
ability to efficaciously attend to and encode feedback that
would be important for success. As a result, perceptions of
underperformance may lead stigmatized minorities to
make negative internal attributions as opposed to Whites
who tend to make external attributions.
E3
SEROTONIN AND IMPULSIVE DECISION-MAKING:
CONTRASTING
EFFECTS
OF
TRYPTOPHAN
DEPLETION ON VARIETIES OF IMPULSIVITY Molly
Crockett, University of Cambridge; Luke Clark, University of
Cambridge; Golnaz Tabibnia, UCLA; Matthew Lieberman,
UCLA; Trevor Robbins, University of Cambridge – Serotonin
(5-HT) has long been implicated in a range of emotional
and behavioural control processes, and previous
influential theories have associated impaired or decreased
5-HT function with impulsivity. However, recent findings
suggest this model to be overly simplistic. This may result
from the likelihood that there are multiple varieties of
impulsivity, each with a unique neural substrate. We
temporarily lowered 5-HT levels in healthy volunteers
using an acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) procedure in
order to investigate the relationship between 5-HT
function and three varieties of impulsivity: motor
impulsivity, measured by commission errors on a Go/Nogo task; reflection impulsivity, or the failure to gather
sufficient information before making a decision; and social
impulsivity, indexed by the tendency to reject unfair offers
in an Ultimatum Game. When interpreted in terms of
impulsivity, the different tasks revealed dramatically
contrasting effects of ATD, ranging from impairment to
improvement.
When framed in terms of emotion
regulation, however, the tasks showed consistent effects of
ATD. Taken together, these results suggest that 5-HT
modulates the impact of emotion on decision-making, and
highlight the importance of distinguishing varieties of
impulsivity when considering their neural substrates.
E4
IS OUR SELF BASED ON REWARD? SELFRELATEDNESS RECRUITS NEURAL ACTIVITY IN
THE REWARD SYSTEM G. Northoff; M. Rotte; R. Paus; D.
Moritz; R. Thiemann; U. Proesch; U. Bruer; S. Moerth; C.

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

Tempelmann; B. Bogerts; M. De Greck, Otto-von-Guericke
University of Magdeburg – Every organism has to evaluate
incoming stimuli according to their current and future
significance. The immediate value of every stimulus is
coded by the reward system, but the processing of their
long-term relevance implements a valuation system that
implicates self-relatedness. This suggests that regional
activity during self-relatedness builds upon the reward
system. Using event-related functional MRI, we
investigated whether self-relatedness can be differentiated
from the reward system by the temporal pattern in neural
activity. Self-relatedness induced signal changes in the
bilateral Nucleus accumbens (NACC), ventral tegmental
area (VTA) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC).
The same regions were recruited during reward. The
BOLD time course revealed no difference between
conditions in the first xxx seconds of the BOLD signal,
whereas subsequently self-relatedness showed a higher
late signal change than reward. In sum, our findings
indicate sustained recruitment of the reward system
during self-relatedness. These findings may contribute to a
better understanding the reward-based nature of our self.
In a second step, data from patients with alcoholism will
be demonstrated that show neural dissociation between
reward and self-relatedness in reward circuitry. This lends
further support to the close relationship and distinction
between self and reward. Finally, methodological issues of
how to investigate self-relatedness and its distinct
psychological components will be discussed.

E6
DOES
EMOTION
ALWAYS
"BOUND"
RATIONALITY? Pranjal H. Mehta, The University of Texas
at Austin; Jennifer S. Beer, The University of Texas at Austin –
Economic models of decision-making begin with the
assumption of rational decision-making based on
cognitive factors. Humans are considered to make
decisions based on "bounded" rationality because under
certain circumstances, people predictably make less than
rational decisions. For example, people may have negative
perceptions of unequal offers or gambles that are framed
as losses. The negative perceptions are theorized to engage
an "emotional" system which has more impact on
decisions than the 'rational' cognitive metric of monetary
gain. Brain imaging studies suggest that regions that
encode valence and arousal such as the insula and
amygdala drive bounded rationality whereas rationality is
supported by regions associated with control such as the
frontal cortex. In a series of studies, we identify individual
differences that reliably predict rationality and bounded
rationality in the Ultimatum Game and investigate the
relative involvement of regions involved in valence and
control. Study 1 found that people high in Agreeableness
and high in Openness were more like to accept unfair
offers. Study 2 replicated these behavioral effects and
identified the neural systems that mediate rational and
irrational decision-making. Irrational decision-making
results were consistent with previous studies (Sanfey et al.
2003). Rational decision-making involved regions
associated with valence and cognitive control. For
instance, higher Openness predicted greater activity in the
left caudate and left orbitofrontal cortex in response to
unfair offers. Greater activity in these regions also
predicted rational decision-making. Together these studies
suggest that both rationality and bounded rationality are
associated with interactions between emotion and
cognition.

E5
SUBLIMINAL FACIAL EXPRESSIONS INFLUENCE
CONSUMPTION BY MODULATING UNCONSCIOUS
AFFECT: EVIDENCE FROM EMG AND APPETITIVE
REFLEX-MODULATION M.J. Starr, UCSD; J. Lin, UCSD;
P. Winkielman, UCSD – Subliminal facial expressions can
influence appetitive behavior, such as consumption of a
novel drink. However, is this effect accompanied by a
genuine change in an affective state? In the current study,
we tested the engagement of appetitive and defensive
systems by measuring the influence of masked subliminal
happy and angry faces on physiology, beverage
consumption, and mood ratings. We found a significant
valence effect on an appetitive reflex (the post-auricular
muscle response) and zygomaticus activity, with
responses greater after happy than angry faces.
Behaviorally, happy faces increased consumption
compared to angry, though this effect was limited in time.
The effects on the measures of the defensive system
(startle blink and corrugator activity) were non-significant.
Despite significant changes in physiological and
behavioral measures of appetitive response, mood ratings
(PANAS) revealed no significant changes in conscious
feelings. These results suggest that unconscious affective
stimuli can influence consumption behavior by inducing a
genuine, if unfelt, change in positive affect.

E7
FAIRNESS REDEFINED: AN INVESTIGATION OF
THE FIXED OPPONENT VERSION OF THE
ULTIMATUM GAME J. Beadle, University of Iowa; C.
Kovach, University of Iowa; S. Paradiso, University of Iowa; D.
Tranel, University of Iowa – Human behavior on the
Ultimatum Game (UG), a widely used economic game,
demonstrates that fairness is valued when individuals
make decisions in a social context. In the UG, one player
(the Proposer) is given a sum of money to split with
another player (the Responder). If the Responder accepts
the offer, both players receive the proposed division,
whereas if the Responder rejects the offer, both players get
nothing. The current study investigated how a modified
version of the UG, the Fixed Opponent Game, compared
to the standard 1- Shot Game. In the Fixed Opponent
version, the same two players remain paired across all 20
rounds of the UG, rather than playing a new partner on
each round as in the 1-Shot version. We studied 28 pairs of
normal adults (25-81 years) who played the Fixed
Opponent Game. Results were compared to findings from

13

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

two studies (Koenigs & Tranel, 2007; Sanfey et. al, 2003)
that are representative of the standard 1-Shot version.
Interesting differences emerged for the "unfair" offersoffers where the Proposer keeps more money than s/he
gives. Specifically, while clearly unfair offers ($1 and $2)
were rejected more than 50% of the time in the Fixed
Opponent game (similar to 1-Shot games), "ambiguously"
unfair offers of $3 and $4 were rejected at a much higher
rate in the Fixed Opponent version (61%, versus 10% in
the 1-Shot version). These findings suggest that repeated
interactions with another individual may enhance
competition and set a higher bar for perceived "fairness."

Gregory McCarthy, Yale University – Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) has revealed similar patterns of
activation in the fusiform gyrus (FG) in response to faces
and bodies without faces. These findings have generated
competing hypotheses regarding the role of the
occipitotemporal cortex during social perception. For
example, Cox and colleagues have suggested that FG
activation may be modulated by context (Science, 2004),
while alternative explanations suggest that separable
category-specific responses for faces and bodies exist in
closely adjacent cortical patches. Here we recorded from
subdural electrodes in four consecutive human patients
undergoing epilepsy monitoring. A screening task
consisting of pictures of faces, tools, fruits, animals, and
letterstrings was first used first identify face-specific sites.
A face-specific site was one in which faces evoked a large
potential at ~200 ms (N200) that was at least twice as large
in amplitude as that evoked by any other stimulus
category. In the primary task, subjects viewed faces,
flowers, and bodies without faces. At face-specific sites,
bodies and flowers evoked equivalent N200s that were
much smaller than face N200s. No other electrode site in
ventral occipitotemporal cortex showed evidence for a
body-specific N200. However, in one patient, an
equivalent N200 ERP to faces and bodies was obtained at
a face-specific site in lateral occipitotemporal surface near
the middle occipital gyrus. We consider how these
findings relate to the current literature of face and body
processing, and to recent reports of body-specific ERPs
recorded from lateral temporal scalp electrodes.

E8
BRAIN MORPHOLOGY FOLLOWING BILATERAL
AMYGDALA LESIONS Aaron D. Boes*, University of Iowa;
Sonya Mehta*, University of Iowa; David Rudrauf, University
of Iowa; Ralph Adolphs, University of Iowa, California Institute
of Technology; Peg Nopoulos, University of Iowa; Douglas
Langbehn, University of Iowa; Thomas Grabowski, University
of Iowa * Indicates both authors contributed equally –
Emotional and social cognition relies on interactions
between the amygdala and multiple cortical and
subcortical brain systems. We hypothesized that the
structural integrity of those connected brain systems
would partially depend on the presence of a functional
amygdala. Specifically, we hypothesized that bilateral
amygdala lesions would result in gray matter
morphometric abnormalities due to disconnection in 1) the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and connected
subcortical structures (the striatum and mediodorsal
thalamus) and in 2) the ventral visual stream. We also
hypothesized that brain regions with sparse amygdala
connections would not show such abnormalities
(including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DL PFC) and
the dorsal visual stream). We measured brain
morphometry in two women (S.M and A.P) with rare
restricted bilateral amygdala lesions (respectively 100%
and 50% damaged) and in groups of gender- and agematched
comparison
subjects,
using
multiple
neuroimaging analysis techniques. S.M. showed increased
cortical thickness in the vmPFC and a relative increase in
the volume of the vmPFC and caudate. Cortical regions
along the ventral visual stream showed decreased
thickness and a relative decrease in volume. A.P. also
demonstrated a similar trend of increased thickness in the
vmPFC. In both subjects, the DL PFC and dorsal visual
stream presented a normal morphometric profile. These
findings support the hypothesis that the integrity of the
vmPFC and of regions related to the ventral visual stream
depends on the integrity of the amygdala. This is the first
evidence in humans of the remote alteration of brain
morphology in association with amygdala lesions.

E10
FLEXIBILITY
IN
AUTOMATIC
INTERGROUP
CATEGORIZATION Nathan L. Arbuckle, The Ohio State
University; Jay J. Van Bavel, The Ohio State University;
Dominic J. Packer, The Ohio State University; Ashley
Waggoner, University of Indiana; William A. Cunningham,
The Ohio State University – Research on person
categorization suggests that people tend to automatically
categorize others according to group memberships (e.g.
Brewer, 1988; Fiske & Neuberg, 1990). One such group
membership that has been extensively studied is race.
Other research using electroencephalography (EEG)
examining the timecourse of intergroup categorization has
found that White participants tend to show an early
difference in processing Black faces as opposed to White
faces (Ito, Thompson, & Cacioppo, 2004). In the present
study, we wanted to examine the role of induced
motivational shifts in producing changes in early racial
processing. Specifically, we wanted to see if inducing an
approach motivational state would lead to differences in
processing when viewing members of a racial outgroup.
To examine this, we manipulated approach and avoidance
motivational states by having participants push or pull a
joystick while seeing White or Black faces; participants
performed this task while being measured with EEG. As
expected, results showed a replication of previous
findings when participants were in an avoidant
motivational state, such that they showed smaller P100

E9
ERPS RECORDED FROM SUBDURAL ELECTRODES
IN HUMAN OCCIPITOTEMPORAL CORTEX IN
RESPONSE TO FACE AND BODY STIMULI James P.
Morris, Yale University; Kenneth Vives, Yale University;

14

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

(and larger N170) waveform to Black than to White faces.
Additionally, source localization indicates that these
differences occur in the fusiform gyrus. Critically, when
participants were in an approach motivational state, there
were no differences in their reactions to White and Black
faces, confirming our hypothesis. These data demonstrate
that automatic person categorization is a flexible process
that can be affected by motivational states.

frontal electrode sites (FPz, Fz, F3) and was significantly
attenuated by repetition. A later positive ERP evoked by
fearful expressions peaked at approximately 400ms poststimulus over central-posterior scalp (Cz, CPz, Pz) and
was also attenuated by repetition. These enhanced ERPs
were not evoked by the other facial expressions,
suggesting that the neural response to fear is different
from that evoked by other facial expressions. It is notable
that the early response to fearful face expressions occurs
earlier in latency that either the subdurally-recorded facespecific N200 from the fusiform gyrus, and the scalprecorded N170 ERP recorded from lateral posterior scalp
electrodes. Although face identity was not our focus, we
found that identity repetitions produced progressive
signal attenuation between 220-350 ms despite differences
in expression. This signal recovered at the beginning of
the second block, but then rapidly attenuated.the next
presentation. This result suggests long-term savings
following repetition of specific identity.

E11
NEURAL RESPONSE TO RECEIPT OF PEER
FEEDBACK IN ADOLESCENCE Eric E. Nelson, NIMH;
Amanda E. Guyer, NIMH; Erin B. McClure-Tone, Georgia
State University; Daniel S. Pine, NIMH – The emotional
importance of peer interactions in adolescence has been
relatively well-characterized using observational and selfreport techniques, but few laboratory-based experiments
have been used to assess this phenomenon. We present
results of a new functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) paradigm designed to elicit neural response to
socially-evaluative feedback from peers. The "Chatroom
Task," had two phases. In phase one, subjects were told
they were participating in a study of internet-based
interaction among teenagers and would have a brief chat
session with a peer. Subjects then viewed photographs of
other adolescents and rated their interest in interacting
with them (stimulus desirability). Subjects were
themselves photographed and told the other participants
would also rate their photograph. In phase two, subjects
underwent neuroimaging while they were shown
feedback (accept or reject) from the peers the subjects had
previously rated. Subjects' desirability ratings were used
in two contrasts: acceptance vs. rejection from highinterest peers and from low-interest peers. Acceptance
relative to rejection from both high and low desirable
peers engaged medial prefrontal cortex. However,
acceptance only engaged reward regions (striatum) when
it came from high desirable peers while acceptance from
low desirable peers engaged orbitofrontal cortex, possibly
indicating response flexibility activation. Subjects' selfreports indicated more positive emotions to acceptance
than rejection from high-desirable peers but not from lowdesirable peers. Combining neuroimaging methods with
traditional behavioral assessments may help elucidate
how biological and sociocultural factors affect cognition,
emotion, and behavior in adolescence.

E13
TO SLOW DOWN OR NOT TO SLOW DOWN:
NEURAL PROCESSES DURING RISK TAKING IN A
STOP SIGNAL TASK Chiang-shan Ray Li, Yale University;
Peisi Yan, Yale University; Tien-Wen Lee, Yale University –
Background Cognitive control allows behavioral
flexibility. Impairment in cognitive control has been
implicated in a number of psychiatric conditions,
including OCD, ADHD, and impulse control and
substance use disorders. In previous studies we combined
fMRI and a stop signal task (SST) to dissect the component
processes of cognitive control - response inhibition, error
detection and post-error behavioral adjustment. Here we
report a novel finding related to risk-taking in the SST.
Methods In a SST, that tracked participants' performance
so errors are elicited approximately half of the time,
participants displayed great variability in go trial reaction
time (RT, n=40). Brain imaging data collected with this
rapid event-related design was modeled with events of
interest, including post-go go trials with RT increase
(pGGi, risk-aversive decision) and those with RT decrease
(pGGd, risk-taking decision). Results We observed greater
activation in bilateral visual cortices, left amygdala,
precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex, and middle frontal
gyrus during risk-taking, as compared to risk-aversive
decisions (p<0.05, FWE corrected). Conversely, no brain
regions showed greater activation during risk-aversive
compared to risk-taking decisions (p<0.01, uncorrected)
Conclusions These results delineate the neural circuitry
specifically involved in behaviors that mimic risk-related
decisions during the SST. The results have broadened the
utility of the SST in the investigation of the neural
processes underlying many clinical conditions, in which
deficits in cognitive control are implicated.

E12
EARLY DIFFERENTIATION OF RESPONSES TO
EMOTIONAL FACE REPETITION Elise Christopher, Yale
University; Harlan Fichtenholtz, Yale University; Steven Lao,
Yale University; Marcia Johnson, Yale University; Gregory
McCarthy, Yale University – This study examined the
electrophysiological correlates of emotional face
repetition. Eighteen participants viewed angry, fearful,
happy and neutral faces, with each expression portrayed
by the same 40 actors. Subjects performed a gender
discrimination cover task. Fearful expressions evoked an
enhanced response that peaked at 108ms post-stimulus at

E14
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
EXECUTIVE DYSFUNCTION IN ALEXITHYMIA
Whitney L. Thomas, Bates College; Nancy S. Koven, Bates

15

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

College – The construct of alexithymia is defined by
difficulty attending to and distinguishing among
emotions, as well as an externally-oriented thinking style.
While not a unique clinical syndrome per se, alexithymia
has been implicated in numerous medical and psychiatric
conditions. Etiological theories of alexithymia include
frontal lobe impairment, which would suggest
corresponding weaknesses in executive functioning.
Although some studies have identified isolated cognitive
deficits in alexithymics, no study to date has
systematically investigated executive functioning in this
population while simultaneously deconstructing the
alexithymia
construct
into
empirically-derived
dimensions. In this study, 104 unselected participants
completed self-report surveys of alexithymia (Toronto
Alexithymia Scale, Trait Meta Mood Scale, Mood
Awareness Scale), as well as a neuropsychological
measure of executive functioning (BRIEF-A). Principal
components analysis revealed two alexithymia-related
factors: Emotional Clarity (EC; 42% of the total variance)
and Emotional Monitoring (EM; 26% of the total variance).
Subsequent analyses revealed that low-EC participants (N
= 15) performed worse than high-EC participants (N = 15),
F(9,20) = 4.0, p = .005, across multiple executive function
domains, including behavioral initiation and inhibition,
set-shifting, self-monitoring, working memory, error
recognition, and ability to plan and organize. No
relationship was found between EM and patterns of
cognitive performance. These data further suggest frontal
lobe abnormality in alexithymia when specifically
considering the EC aspect of the construct.

greater recruitment of dorsal cingulate and lateral frontal
cortices to congruent and incongruent trials relative to
view trials; this was not seen for highly negative
distracters. These results have two main implications:
First, sufficiently intense emotional distracters can disrupt
the recruitment of regions of frontal cortex implicated in
attentional control. Second, assumptions of frontal
pathology in PTSD based on responding to emotional
stimuli may be unwarranted; instead, the reduced frontal
activity may reflect an appropriate response to the
pathological intensity of the emotional stimulus.
E16
THE NEURAL UNDERPINNING OF THEORY OF
MIND: EVIDENCE FROM FMRI ADAPTATION J.R.
Andrews-Hanna, Harvard University, Massachusetts General
Hospital; R. Saxe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; R.
Poulin, Harvard University, Massachusetts General Hospital;
R. Buckner, Harvard University, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical Institute – A growing
body of literature highlights a set of brain regions
involved in attributing mental beliefs to others. This
critical social skill, referred to as "theory of mind," is
consistently linked to temporoparietal junction (TPJ)
prominently in the right hemisphere (e.g. Saxe &
Kanwisher, NI, 2003; Saxe & Powell, Psychol. Sci, 2006).
Additional regions including dorsal medial prefrontal
cortex (dMPFC), posterior cingulate, and superior
temporal sulcus (STS) are also recruited during theory of
mind tasks (Frith & Frith, Curr. Biol, 2007). In order to
further investigate the neural underpinnings of processes
linked to solving these tasks, the present study used fMRI
adaption - the reduction in fMRI hemodynamic response
when a specific process is facilitated through repetition
(reviewed in Henson, Prog. Neurobiol., 2003). Pertinent to
understanding theory of mind, repetition effects in rTPJ
would enable dissociation of task effects from non-task
effects. 51 participants (21.8 years; 31 female) underwent
fMRI scanning (3T, 12 channel). Across four functional
runs, participants read a series of false belief and false
photo stories, half shown earlier (repeated) and half novel.
Results revealed robust repetition-related reductions for
repeated stories in right and left TPJ, STS, and dMPFC.
Interestingly, repetition effects were also present in many
of the regions for false photo stories, although to a
significantly greater extent for false belief stories. In
conjunction with additional observations, these results
highlight fMRI adaptation as an important approach for
studying social cognition.

E15
THE
EFFECTS
OF
NEGATIVE
EMOTIONAL
DISTRACTERS ON BOLD RESPONSES ASSOCIATED
WITH
GOAL-DIRECTED
PROCESSING
AND
EMOTION REGULATION Ilana T. Naftalin, NIMH;
Samantha L. Crowe, NIMH; and R. James R. Blair, NIMH –
Previously, we examined modulation of emotional
responding by attentional control and the modulation of
attentional control by emotion (Blair et al., 2007).
Emotional distracters did not significantly disrupt regions
of dorsal anterior cingulate and lateral prefrontal cortex
implicated in attentional control. However, in recent work
with PTSD patients, emotional distracters significantly
disrupted these regions. This might reflect putative frontal
pathology in PTSD or the greater impact of emotional
distracters in PTSD patients. We tested this latter
hypothesis in the current study by having three levels of
distracter (neutral, moderately negative, highly negative)
to determine if increased emotional intensity of distracters
disrupts frontal systems involved in attentional control.
Healthy volunteers (N=18) were scanned using eventrelated fMRI on an affective Stroop task. In this task, two
numerical displays are bracketed by emotional distracters.
The displays are either congruent (two 2s vs. three 3s) or
incongruent (two 3s vs. three 2s). For view-only trials,
only the emotional distracter is displayed. Neutral and
low negative distracters were associated with significantly

E17
E-MODEL OF EMOTION REGULATION: A PDP
APPROACH C. Gatti, Stanford University; J. McClelland,
Stanford University; N. Giuliani, Stanford University; J.J.
Gross, Stanford University – The present study aim is to
simulate J. Gross' Emotion Regulation Paradigm by
creating an experimental environment with a Parallel
Distributed Processing (PDP) approach. Early models of
emotion regulation focus on appraisal theories, non-

16

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

linearity and neural network modeling (Barrett et al,
2007). However, no studies to date have used the
Interactive Activation and Competition (IAC) architecture
to recreate a coherent covariation among experiential,
behavioral and peripheral physiology of emotion
regulation. The present IAC model is partially constrained
upon experimental data about cognitive reappraisal of
amusement (Giuliani et al, in press) and by J. Gross'
theoretical approach to emotion regulation (Gross, 2001).
PDPTool is the neural network simulator used to develop
the present IAC model, created and tested by McClelland
on Microsoft Window XP and Matlab version 7.2 R2006a.
Model units are interconnected by bi-directional links
with weight fixed either +1 or -1, and units' activation
changes over time in accord with the model-learning
algorithm. Subjects' responses simulation has been tested
running cycles after imposing cognitive reappraisal to the
amusement activation state. Results indicate that the
present IAC model is unstable if emotion elicitation
activation units have a weight above +0.4. However,
below +0.4, the model can significantly distinguish
between up- and down-regulation of amusement in all
created domains. Thus, results indicate the necessity to
expand the architecture sensitivity and stability by
constraint satisfaction; so, additional experiments about
cognitive reappraisal (e.g. disgust) are required. Overall,
the present PDP model suggests the IAC suitability to
simulate J. Gross' Emotion Regulation Paradigm.

habituation to these faces and sensitization to anger faces
in BL. These effects derive from feedback from higher
brain regions when stimuli are repeatedly presented in the
BL design.
E19
ADAPTING HUMAN FEAR CONDITIONING TO A
FULLY-IMMERSIVE
3-DIMENSIONAL
VIRTUAL
REALITY ENVIRONMENT Nicole C. Huff, Duke
University; David Zeilinski, Duke University; Holton S.
Thompson Duke University; Jose Alba Hernandez, Duke
University; Rachael Brady, Duke University; Kevin S. LaBar,
Duke University – Pavlovian fear conditioning is a widely
used paradigm in non-human animal research to
investigate the neural mechanisms underlying fear and
anxiety. A major challenge in conducting conditioning
studies in humans is the ability to strongly manipulate or
simulate the environmental contexts that are associated
with conditioned emotional behaviors. In this regard,
virtual reality (VR) technology is a promising tool .Yet,
adapting this technology to meet experimental constraints
requires special accommodations. Here we address the
methodological issues involved when conducting fear
conditioning in a fully immersive, 6-sided VR
environment. To study the influence of context on fearrelated processes, VR scripts were created using Virtools
software for three distinct environments: home interior,
neighborhood, and forest. Maya computer graphics were
used to design dynamic conditioned stimuli (CSs - snakes
and spiders), then imported into Virtools. Some of the
constraints made on VR technology are as follows. To
control the duration and viewing angle of each context,
the participant was taken on a guided path through the
context at a seated at eye level. This feature also
minimized proprioceptive dissonance for the participant
and reduced movement artifacts in skin conductance
response (SCR) recordings. Path shape, length, and
context complexity were matched across environments. To
time-lock fear responses to stimulus type and context
configuration, the location and duration of CS
presentation and wrist shock (US) onset was specified
along the navigational path. Preliminary data will be
presented
to
illustrate
how
addressing
these
methodological issues permitted investigation of
contextual influences on fear relapse with virtual reality
technology.

E18
AMYGDALA RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL FACE
WITH DIFFERENT DESIGN METHODS Xiaoyun Liang,
Brandeis University; Leslie Zebrowitz, Brandeis University;
Itzhak Aharon, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
University – Goals: Our aim was to investigate the
contribution of methodological variations to activation of
the amygdala while viewing disgusted, angry, happy,
fearful, and neutral faces. To this end, we compared
responses to emotion faces presented in a block design
(BL) with responses in an event-related design (ER).
Methods: Participants (17 for BL and 16 for ER design)
passively viewed disgusted, angry, happy, fearful, and
neutral faces in a 3T scanner (TR=2000ms; TE=30ms;
FOV=40_20 cm; functional image resolution=3.1 _ 3.1_4.8
mm; 30 slices covering whole brain). Results: Differences
among emotion faces in percent signal changes (PSC)
differed between BL and ER. In BL, PSC for fear and
neutral faces were lower than for disgust, anger, and
happy. In ER, however, PSC for fear and neutral faces was
comparable to the other emotions. Habituation of PSC in
BL was analyzed using ANOVA. There was significant
habituation for both fearful and neutral faces in bilateral
amygdala (for fear, left, p=0.000, right, p=0.004; for
neutral, left, p=0.025, right, p=0.000). There also was
significant sensitization for angry faces in right amygdala
(p=0.046). We assumed that there was no habituation or
sensitization for our ER data, since ER is more resistant to
such effects. Conclusion: Relatively lower PSC to fear and
neutral faces in a BL than ER design may result from

E20
RECOGNITION OF A THREATENING SITUATION
IN DYNAMIC BODY EXPRESSIONS WITH AND
WITHOUT ATTENTION C.B.A. Sinke, University of
Tilburg, University of Maastricht; B. Sorger, University of
Maastricht; R. Goebel, University of Maastricht; B. de Gelder,
University of Tilburg, Massachusetts General Hospital – Being
able to recognize and react to a threatening situation has
considerable adaptive value and requires rapid appraisal
of the situation even if one's attention is occupied
otherwise. The neurobiological basis of perceiving bodily
signals of threat is thus far still poorly understood. Using

17

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), this study
tried to investigate the neuronal structures involved in
perceiving threat signals derived from dynamic whole
bodies. Furthermore, this study also explored the role of
attention in the perception of body expressions of threat.
Twelve subjects were being scanned while they were
shown 3s movies (192 trials and 96 scrambles) of either a
threatening or a teasing situation. In one condition they
paid attention to the emotion and decided whether the
situation was threatening, while in the other case they
focused on three randomly appearing dots and decided
whether they were of the same color or not. We show that
the major body sensitive visual areas are modulated by
emotion with increased activation for threat videos.
Activation of the fusiform gyrus by the bodies is strongly
affected by attentional modulation. The right middle
temporal/middle occipital gyrus shows an interaction
effect between emotion and attention. Right superior
temporal sulcus (STS) shows a main effect for emotion and
attention and also an interaction effect. Consistent with
earlier findings, left amygdala (AMG) is more activated
when attention is on the bodies than on the dots,
irrespective of emotion. These results show how attention
modulates the neural correlates of threat perception in
dynamic bodies.

matter volume in the right OFC and the right ventral
ACC. CU traits correlated positively with the volume of
grey matter in these areas. Conclusions: Our results
replicate and extend findings of prior studies in adults
with psychopathy and children with CP. Subgroup of
children with CP/CU+ traits had structural differences in
two brain areas involved in decision-making and emotion
regulation (OFC and ACC).
E22
SOCIAL ATTRIBUTION TO 'TRIANGLES PLAYING
TRICKS' IS DIMINISHED AND DOES NOT IMPROVE
WITH AGE AMONG CHILDREN WITH HIGH
FUNCTIONING AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS
Gregory L. Wallace, NIMH; Benjamin E. Yerys, Children's
National Medical Center; Mark J. Celano, NIMH; Joette D.
James, Children's National Medical Center; Jennifer Sokoloff,
Children's National Medical Center; Lauren E. Kenworthy,
Children's National Medical Center; Jay N. Giedd, NIMH –
We sought to examine uncued social attribution to
interacting geometric shapes in children with high
functioning autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) versus
typically developing (TD) children and to investigate agerelated changes in social attribution performance for each
of the groups. 44 children with a high functioning ASD
and 44 TD children matched group-wise on age (7-16
years), IQ (80+), and sex ratio (80% male) were shown the
'Triangles Playing Tricks' task and asked to provide verbal
descriptions of the animations. Responses to goal-directed
and 'theory of mind' animations were rated for
appropriateness and 'intentionality.' A significant main
effect of group but no significant group by condition
interaction was found for intentionality ratings, indicating
that children with ASDs were less likely to ascribe
intentionality to characters in both types of animations.
This could not be explained by discrepant verbal output
since no group difference in length of verbal descriptions
was noted. Age was positively associated with both
indices of performance on the theory of mind animations
for TD, but not ASD children. Moreover, regression
analyses indicated that not only age but also an age x
group interaction term significantly predicted both indices
of performance on the theory of mind animations. High
functioning children with ASDs demonstrated a
diminished likelihood of assigning intentionality to
uncued, impoverished animations of interacting geometric
shapes. In contrast to the pattern observed among TD
children, theory of mind performance did not improve
with age among high functioning children with ASDs.

E21
CORTICAL STRUCTURES IN CHILDREN WITH
CONDUCT
PROBLEMS
AND
CALLOUSUNEMOTIONAL
TRAITS:
A
VOXEL-BASED
MORPHOMETRY STUDY StÇphane De Brito, King's
College; Andrea Mechelli, King's College; Alice Jones, King's
College, University College; Marko Wilke, 3University of
TÅbingen; Kristin Laurens1, Gareth Barker, King's College;
Sheilagh Hodgins, King's College; Essi Viding, King's College,
University College – Background: Brain imaging studies in
adults with psychopathy and children with conduct
problems only (CP) point to abnormalities in limbic and
prefrontal regions involved in emotion recognition,
emotion regulation, decision-making, and empathy.
Children with conduct problems (CP) and callousunemotional traits (CP/CU+) are thought to be at risk of
developing psychopathy. However, to date, no brain
imaging study has examined this subgroup of children
with CP. Goals of the study: We set out to investigate
whether, compared with typically developing boys, boys
with elevated levels of CP/CU+ traits would have
structural differences in brain regions previously
identified in studies of adults with psychopathy and
children with CP. Methods: Our sample consisted of
community based boys aged 10-13 years with CP/CU+
traits in the top 10% (n=23) and typically developing
controls (n=25). We conducted voxel-based morphometry
analyses.
Specifically,
we
created
study-specific
probability maps and identified four regions of interest
(Orbitofrontal (OFC), anterior cingulate (ACC), and
insular cortices, and amygdala) for our analyses. Results:
Group comparisons indicated that compared with control
boys children with CP/CU+ traits had increased grey

E23
MEMORY
PROCESSING
ASSOCIATED
WITH
OUTGROUP FACES PRESENTED IN A NEGATIVE
STEREOTYPIC CONTEXT IS MODERATED BY
MOTIVATION TO NOT BE PREJUDICED: FMRI AND
BEHAVIORAL EVIDENCE Christine Cox, University of
Arizona; Chad Forbes, University of Arizona; Lee Ryan,
University of Arizona – An fMRI study assessed neural
correlates of contextual modulation of negative implicit

18

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

attitudes toward outgroup members; participants heard
various types of music (violent, misogynistic rap [VMR],
nonviolent rap, death metal) during presentation of fast
(30ms) and slow (525ms) Black and White faces. A
surprising result was observed in the hippocampus, a
structure critical for memory: bilateral activity unique to
fast Black faces in the VMR condition. Two hypotheses
could explain this activation: 1) outgroup faces presented
in negative, stereotypic contexts are interpreted as salient
and potentially threatening and engage memory encoding
processes, potentially predicted based on emotional
memory literature (encoding hypothesis); or 2) following
outgroup homogeneity effects, these faces are processed
generically, as opposed to individualistically, leading to
increased semantic memory processing (homogeneity
hypothesis). No memory measures were collected in the
imaging study, so a behavioral study was carried out
using the same general paradigm, but including a surprise
recognition test. Results indicated poor memory in all
conditions, but recognition of Black faces in VMR was
moderated by one's motivation to not be prejudiced.
Better recognition was associated with more motivation,
poorer recognition with less motivation. This provides
preliminary support for the encoding hypothesis since all
participants in the fMRI study reported high motivation to
not be prejudiced. It is possible that when primed with
negative stereotypes, people low in motivation to not be
prejudiced may be more likely to stereotype, possibly via
a lack of effort or inability to encode individual faces that
belong to the negatively stereotyped outgroup.

individuated judgments engaged a network associated
with Theory of Mind (ToM), including left
temporoparietal junction, superior temporal sulcus, and
middle frontal gyrus. Critically, activity in a localized
region of paracingulate cortex (PCC), important for
reasoning/representing another's mind, showed a robust
interaction: while the PCC elicited greater activity when
judging individuated relative to non-individuated Whites,
it was not 'online' when judging Blacks. The findings point
to distinct neural circuitry involved in judging
individuated versus non-individuated others. We
speculate that the amygdala may facilitate snap social
judgments. The PCC is distinguished from other regions
involved in ToM by its selectivity to ingroup (White)
members, possibly providing a neural correlate of
outgroup dehumanization.
E25
TO BRAKE OR ACCELERATE WHEN THE LIGHT
TURNS YELLOW? AGE DIFFERENCES IN HOW
STRESS AFFECTS RISK TAKING IN A DRIVING
GAME Mara Mather, University of Southern California;
Marissa Gorlick, University of Southern California; Nichole
Kryla-Lighthall, University of Southern California – Stress
affects brain systems involved in risk and reward
processing. Yet, despite the fact that important decisions
and stress often go hand in hand, little is known about the
influence of stress on decision processes. In our study, we
compared younger and older participants' risk-taking in a
driving game (N = 92). Before starting the game, half of
the participants in each age group submerged their left
hand in ice water for three minutes, a stress induction that
raises cortisol levels. (In the control group, participants
submerged their hand in warm water.) We measured both
cortisol and salivary alpha amylase responses to the stress
manipulation. In the driving game, participants earned
points while driving a car but not while it was stopped.
During each trial, a green traffic light turned yellow and
then, at a random interval, turned red. If the car was
stopped when the light turned red, participants were
awarded the points they had earned on that trial.
Otherwise, they lost the points. Thus, driving the car while
the light was yellow was risky. Overall, when compared
with the control condition, stress significantly reduced
older adults' total points (by nearly half of the total),
because older adults spent much less time driving during
yellow lights in the stress condition than in the control
condition. In contrast, stress slightly increased younger
adults' risk taking in the task. These results indicate that
stress can have a quite different impact on the risk-taking
tendencies of younger and older adults.

E24
SEPARABLE (AND RACE-SELECTIVE) NEURAL
MECHANISMS FOR JUDGING INDIVIDUATED AND
NON-INDIVIDUATED OTHERS Jonathan B. Freeman,
Tufts University; Daniela Schiller, New York University;
Nicholas O. Rule; Tufts University; Elizabeth A. Phelps, New
York University; Nalini Ambady, Tufts University – From the
quickest glimpse of someone, 'snap' judgments are readily
made using superficial information; these are often
stereotypic, and other times, surprisingly accurate. The
neural basis of these is unclear. We used fMRI with a
factorial design to examine whether dissociable neural
systems underlie non-individuated judgments (i.e., made
at zero-acquaintance given only superficial information)
and individuated judgments (i.e., made when given
additional idiosyncratic information), and if these systems
are sensitive to a target's race. White and Black targets
were either 'introduced' through a gradual presentation of
idiosyncratic
person-descriptive
information
(individuated), or they remained superficial, continuously
accompanied by bogus non-descriptive information (nonindividuated).
Between
information
segments,
participants repeatedly made dispositional judgments
about targets. These judgments never explicitly
corresponded with any person-descriptive information
participants may have received. Whole-brain analyses
revealed that the amygdala showed selective responses to
judgments of non-individuated others. In contrast,

E26
SOCIAL ATTENTION IN YOUNG CHILDREN WITH
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS: EVIDENCE
FROM EYE-TRACKING Meaghan A. Kennedy, Boston
University; Daniela Plesa-Skwerer, Boston University;
Mary A.E. Lindeke, Boston University; Alex B. Fine,
Boston University; and Helen Tager-Flusberg, Boston

19

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

University – Neurodevelopmental disorders are often
characterized by distinct social phenotypes, and the neural
mechanisms underlying this variability are not well
understood. Children with autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) have impaired social reciprocity, whereas
sociability is characteristic of Down Syndrome (DS). We
aimed to investigate attentional processes underlying
variability in social phenotype by recording visual
scanpaths in a preferential looking paradigm. We
examined visual preferences in 2 to 6-year-old typicallydeveloping (TD) children and children with DS and ASD
using a TOBII-1750 eye-tracker. Fifty image pairs of
people with animals, flowers, butterflies, landscapes, or
abstract designs were displayed for 6 seconds, separated
by 1-second central fixation stimuli. To account for
baseline attentional differences, fixation counts per image
were divided by total fixations per trial. Fixations were
counted when point-of-regard remained within 30 pixels
for 100 ms. ANOVA comparing groups on fixations to
social and nonsocial stimuli (excluding animals) yielded a
significant
group-by-category
interaction
(F(2,32)=7.81,p<.01). Children with DS fixated more on
people and less on nonsocial images than the TD and ASD
groups (p<.05). The TD and DS groups preferred people to
nonsocial images (p<.01). Comparing people, abstract, and
animal images yielded another group-by-category
interaction (F(4,62)=2.51,p<.05). TD children preferred
people to abstract images, while the DS group preferred
people to both animals and abstracts (p<.05). Children
with ASD showed no categorical preferences. These
findings suggest that visual preferences reflect the social
phenotypes characteristic of ASD and DS. Eye-tracking
can enhance our understanding of social attentional
processes in children with neurodevelopmental disorders.

subliminally presented blocked (33 ms) emotional faces to
study early unconscious processing streams while the
second used consciously presented (2000 ms) emotional
faces in an event-related design to study late conscious
processing. Clear minus ambiguous threat showed
substantially more activation than the reverse contrast and
we found predicted activation in the bilateral amygdala in
an a priori ROI analysis (p < .05) In the consciously
presented stimuli, the ambiguous minus clear contrast
showed substantially more activation than the reverse
contrast, with significant regions (at p<.001) in the left
amygdala, suggesting that ambiguous threat more
activates the amygdala than clear threat in conscious
processing.
E28
DYNAMIC CONNECTIVITY OF MEDIAL CORTICAL
REGIONS DURING SOCIAL JUDGMENT A.C. Chen,
University of Michigan; R.C. Welsh, University of Michigan; I.
Liberzon, University of Michigan; S.F. Taylor, University of
Michigan – Introduction: Medial cortical structures,
including the anterior medial frontal cortex (aMFC),
ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and posterior
cingulate cortex (PCC), exhibit high resting metabolism
and constitute part of an hypothesized 'default network'.
Cognitive tasks typically decrease activity in this network,
while tasks with self-referential, social or emotional
components increase activity. Furthermore, the network
exhibits spontaneous low-frequency correlations. While
some findings suggest that network correlations are
invariant across tasks, we set out to identify network
dynamics interacting with a task that engages midline
activity. Method: Twenty-one healthy subjects were
instructed to make either preference judgments
(like/dislike) or identify the gender of emotionally salient
faces (Happy, Neutral, Fearful), in pseudorandomized
blocks, separated by baseline/rest blocks. fMRI scans were
obtained using a reverse spiral sequence. Realigned and
normalized images were analyzed in a standard, random
effects model. A psycho-physiological interaction analysis
(PPI) was performed on midline regions of interest
identified from the random effects model. Results:
Preference, relative to gender, recruited more aMFC,
vmPFC and PCC. All three medial cortical regions
displayed task-dependent changes in connectivity, only in
the context of preference. In addition, during the
preference task, both aMFC and PCC showed significant
positive coupling with bilateral frontal cortices, and
dACC/pre-SMA. Discussion: The results support the
theory that medial cortical components of the default
network represent a dynamic functional network that also
interacts with areas engaged by cognitive control. A
disturbance of network homeostasis may be an underlying
mechanism for disorders characterized by abnormal socioemotional functioning, such as schizophrenia and autism.

E27
EARLY AND LATE DISPLAYS SHOW DIFFERENTIAL
ATTUNEMENTS TO CLEAR AND AMBIGUOUS
THREAT: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Robert G.
Franklin, Jr., Pennsylvania State University; Reginald B.
Adams, Jr., Pennsylvania State University, Michael T.
Stevenson, Pennsylvania State University – Responses to
threatening stimuli include both early and late processing
streams, with the early processing stream representing
low-level unconscious processing of threat and the late
processing stream representing high-level conscious
processing of threatening stimuli. In this paradigm, we
tested the idea that early and late processing streams of
threat are differentially tuned to visual representations of
threat. Specifically, early streams, which are visually
cruder, are tuned to clearer threatening displays while late
streams are tuned to more ambiguous displays of threat.
To test this, we used anger and fear faces to represent
threat. Threatening faces can represent either clear threat
when eye gaze is congruent to the approach-avoidance
motivation of the emotion (i.e. direct gaze anger and
averted gaze fear), or ambiguous threat, when the eye
gaze is incongruous to the emotion motivation. We
conducted two fMRI studies, the first using masked

E29
EXPECTING TO LIFT A BOX TOGETHER MAKES
THE LOAD LOOK LIGHTER Adam Doerrfeld, Rutgers,

20

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

The State University of New Jersey; Natalie Sebanz, University
of Birmingham; Maggie Shiffrar, Rutgers, The State University
of New Jersey– In two experiments, we examined how the
social context of a situation may influence object
perception. We investigated whether participants would
judge the weight of a box differently depending on
whether they are expecting to lift it either alone or with
another person. In Experiment 1, participants judged the
weight of a transparent box filled with different amounts
of potatoes (between 1-20 pounds) before lifting it alone or
with another participant. Participants gave written
estimates before and after lifting the box. Results show
that participants expecting to lift boxes with a partner
judged them as lighter than participants expecting to lift
the same boxes alone. In Experiment 2, we investigated
whether the observed effect would hold for action
observation. Participants viewed static images of either
one person lifting a wire basket of different amounts of
potatoes (between 1-20 pounds), or of two people lifting
the same weights together. Participants indicated on a
continuous scale how much they thought the basket
weighed. Results show that when observing pictures of
two people lifting, participants judged the weight to be
lighter than when they saw one person lifting, consistent
with the results of Experiment 1. This suggests that
observers simulated being in the actors' position while
making judgments. Our findings suggest that one's
perception of objects is shaped by one's own action
capabilities in combination with those of others.
Furthermore, this relationship holds during observation of
static pictures. Though we used strictly behavioral
measures, the potential for neuroimaging methods is
there.

(the magnitude of the reinforcement difference between
the objects). A prior fMRI study with this task implicates
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) in decision type
(representing reinforcer outcome value; Blair et al., 2006)
and anterior cingulate in resolving response conflict
relating to reduced reinforcement distance. Val/val
homozygotes made significantly more errors than met
carriers on this task. This related to differences in
sensitivity to reinforcement distance. Whereas met carriers
made fewer errors when stimulus options had a greater
difference in associated values, val/val homozygotes had
similarly high error rates across all reinforcement
distances. These data suggest that frontal dopaminergic
projections are critical for successful stimulus-reinforcer
based decision making.
E31
EMOTIONAL MODULATION OF MEMORY: THE
ROLE OF THE LIMBIC SYSTEM AND GENETICS
Kathryn Handwerger, Tufts University; Lisa M. Shin, Tufts
University, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School – Background: Previous research has demonstrated
that arousing emotional stimuli are remembered better
than neutral stimuli, and that this effect is likely driven by
the amygdala and hippocampus. However, whether the
emotional modulation of memory is affected by specific
genes previously identified as affecting limbic function
(e.g., polymorphisms of the serotonin transporter and
BDNF genes) is unknown. Methods: We used fMRI in
healthy individuals (n=9; 5 male) to assess BOLD signal
while they viewed positive, negative, and neutral pictures
from the International Affective Picture System. A
surprise memory test was administered offline one week
later. fMRI data were analyzed using SPM2. Contrasts
compared BOLD signal in response to the specific
emotional relative to neutral pictures that were
subsequently remembered. Results: A preliminary
repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a significant effect of
picture type (p<.01) indicating better memory for
emotional (positive and negative) than neutral pictures,
even when controlling for false alarm rates (d').
Furthermore, subjects remembered significantly more
negative than positive pictures. fMRI analyses revealed
significantly greater activation in bilateral amygdala, right
hippocampus, and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (all
ps<.001) during the viewing of subsequently remembered
emotional versus neutral pictures. Genetic data are
currently being analyzed and will be presented (along
with a larger N). Conclusions: These preliminary results
support the idea that emotional information is better
remembered than neutral information, and that activation
of limbic regions during encoding helps to account for this
difference. Additional analyses are expected to illuminate
the role of genetics in the modulation of emotional
memory.

E30
REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING
DEFICITS
ASSOCIATED WITH VAL/VAL HOMOZYGOSITY IN
THE COMT VAL158MET POLYMORPHISM N.G.
Hollon, NIMH; J. Devido, NIMH; C.C. Wu, NIMH; E.
Gorodetsky NIMH; R.J.R. Blair, NIMH; K.S. Blair, NIMH –
Catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) is an enzyme
involved
in
the
breakdown
of
catecholamine
neurotransmitters such as dopamine, particularly in
prefrontal cortex. The common Val158Met single
nucleotide polymorphism occurs in the COMT gene such
that methionine (met) substitutions of valine (val) alleles
lead to the production of COMT with reduced enzymatic
activity. This results in greater available prefrontal
dopamine in individuals carrying met alleles than in
val/val homozygotes. In this study, 55 healthy adult
participants provided DNA samples for genotyping and
performed the differential reward and punishment
learning task. This task involves sequential choices
between pairs of stimuli associated with different
magnitudes of reward or punishment. Participants learn
to choose the stimulus that will result in the greater gain
or lesser loss. Trials differ according to decision type
(between objects associated with different reward levels or
different punishment levels) and reinforcement distance

E32
RECOVERING LOSSES AND LOSING RECENT
GAINS: NEURAL EFFECTS OF PRIOR OUTCOMES

21

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

ON CURRENT OUTCOME PROCESSING Daniel
Campbell-Meiklejohn Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, CFIN, Aarhus University; Dick
Passingham, University of Oxford; Robert Rogers, University of
Oxford– Many studies on reward processing show that
same reward or loss can evoke different emotions,
promote different choice behavior and evoke unique
neural activity depending on the context in which they are
experienced. Context can be provided by earlier outcomes.
A relieving reward is not the same experience as a win
that does not recover and a loss may be less aversive if it
can be offset by a prior win. New to the literature, this
study shows how a just a single outcome can affect the
underlying neural process of subsequent outcomes, even
when magnitude (immediate or cumulative) and
probability of the reward is unchanged. In this study, we
used event-related fMRI to compare neural responses of
rewards and losses that follow different prior outcomes (a
prior win or prior loss). Rewards that follow losses evoke
a strong bilateral ventral putamen and inferior frontal
junction response relative to a win of equal magnitude
with no prior outcome. Losses in the context of recent
wins evoke greater ventromedial prefrontal cortex and
hippocampus activity relative to losses of equal
magnitude with no such context. Finally, winning twice in
a row evokes greater right anterior insula activity relative
to a win of equal magnitude (cumulative or immediate) on
its own. These findings show that a single prior outcome
can change the neural processing of current outcomes and
may lead to new studies for characterization of emotions
and cognitions of relief, offsetting of aversive experiences
with prior rewards, and being on a roll.

Apart from additional activations in left lateral prefrontal
cortex and visual cortex, these networks were the only
brain regions where activity was greater during
persuasive than unpersuasive passages. In a second study
using similar methods in a native Korean sample, we
found results that were remarkably consistent with study
one. Conclusions: The current results indicate that the
experience of persuasion may be supported by neural
machinery that overlaps with mentalizing and memory
encoding processes. Future directions and implications
will be discussed.
E34
STAYING COOL WHEN THINGS GET HOT: FMRI
COMPARISON OF TWO REGULATION STRATEGIES
J.P Hayes, Durham VA Medical Center, Duke University
Medical Center; R.A. Morey, Durham VA Medical Center,
Duke University Medical Center; C.M. Petty, Durham VA
Medical Center; S. Seth, Durham VA Medical Center; M.
Smoski, Duke University Medical Center; G. McCarthy, Yale
University; K.S. LaBar, Duke University Medical Center –
Emotion regulation refers to the modulation of the
behavioral, experiential, and physiological aspects of
emotion. Various regulation strategies may have different
effects on emotional experience. In reappraisal the
individual cognitively changes the meaning of the
stimulus which is often superior to expressive suppression
in reducing the impact of negative affect for emotional
stimuli. Although there is an emerging literature on the
neural correlates of strategy use in comparison to nonregulation, or "attend only" conditions, few imaging
studies have directly compared the brain activity patterns
associated with more than one strategy during voluntary
regulation of negative affect. In the present study, healthy
young adults were instructed to reappraise, suppress, or
attend to negative emotional pictures while undergoing
event-related fMRI. Behavioral results revealed that
negative experience was reduced during the emotion
regulation conditions. Imaging results revealed that in
comparison to the attend condition, both reappraisal and
suppression activated lateral and medial prefrontal cortex
regions often associated with cognitive control processing.
When directly compared, reappraisal elicited greater
activity in medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate,
and midbrain, whereas suppression elicited greater
activity in the inferior prefrontal and parietal cortices. In
addition, there was a greater reduction in amygdala
activation during reappraisal than during suppression.
These results provide evidence for partially unique neural
signatures for different regulatory strategies that may
reflect the recruitment of different component processes
during attempts to reduce negative affect.

E33
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERSUASION Emily Falk,
UCLA; Lian Rameson, UCLA; Yoona Kang, Yale University;
Matthew Lieberman, UCLA – Persuasion is at the root of
countless social exchanges in which one person or group
is motivated to have another person or group share its
beliefs, desires, or behavioral intentions. Here, we report
two functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies
that begin to elucidate the neurocognitive networks
associated with feeling persuaded by an argument made
by another individual. Based on previous persuasion
research, candidate neurocognitive networks that might
contribute to persuasion processes were identified,
including regions that support deliberative reasoning,
emotional processing, social cognition, self-referential
processes and memory encoding. Methods: In a first
study, American participants were presented with
arguments relating to a number of different objects and
activities during an fMRI scanning session. Participants
rated the persuasiveness of each overall argument shortly
after exiting the scanner. Results: There was clear evidence
that persuasiveness was associated with increased activity
in networks previously associated with social cognition
(dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, posterior superior
temporal sulcus, temporal poles) and memory encoding
(bilateral hippocampus and left inferior prefrontal cortex).

E35
HOW STEREOTYPE THREAT INFLUENCES THE
ABILITY TO LEARN: AN ERP STUDY OF
ANTICIPATORY
ATTENTION
AND
ERROR
CORRECTION Jennifer A. Mangels, Baruch College, CUNY;
Ronald Whiteman, City College of New York, CUNY; Ted

22

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

Altschuler, City College of New York, CUNY; Brian
Maniscalco, Columbia University; Carol Dweck, Stanford
University; Catherine Good, Baruch College, CUNY – Under
stereotype threat (ST), worry is hypothesized to occupy
working memory resources, ultimately interfering with
performance on resource demanding tasks. Less is known
about the effects of ST on the equally attention demanding
process of explicit learning. In the present study, we
examined the effects of ST on the moment after females
received error feedback on a math task, and right before
they had the opportunity to learn the correct answer and
engage with an interactive math tutor that provided
concrete strategies for remediating their error. Error
remediation was evaluated at a surprise retest given 48hours later. To probe mindset during this intervening
period, we focused on the stimulus preceding negativity
(SPN), a slow cortical potential associated with
anticipation of motivationally-relevant stimuli. To relate
this activity to the learning success, females within threat
and non-threat conditions were each divided into better
and poorer learners based on a median split of the
percentage of errors subsequently corrected. Under nonthreat only, a widespread parieto-occipital SPN, thought
to index anticipation of visual stimuli, was enhanced for
better learners compared to poorer learners. In contrast,
under threat only, an anterior SPN associated with a more
affective aspect of anticipatory attention emerged for
poorer learners compared to better learners, perhaps
reflecting continued rumination on the negative outcome.
These findings suggest that ST can negatively impact
female math students' ability to correct errors by
predisposing them to fixate on negative appraisal of the
error, rather than directing their attention externally
toward information that could facilitate learning.

depending on the individual's level of thrill seeking.
Individuals high in sensation seeking significantly
activated putamen and insula whereas individuals low in
sensation seeking significantly activated anterior cingulate
gyrus and prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest that
our understanding of the neural mediation of risk must
take into account the motivation context of risk and
individual interest in thrill seeking.
E37
DECLARATIVE MEMORY IS CRITICAL FOR
SUSTAINED
ADVANTAGEOUS
COMPLEX
DECISION-MAKING
BEHAVIOR
Rupa
Gupta,
University of Iowa; Melissa C. Duff, University of Iowa; Natalie
L. Denburg, University of Iowa; Neal J. Cohen, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Antoine Bechara, University of
Southern California; Daniel Tranel, University of Iowa –
Previous studies have reported conflicting evidence
concerning the contribution of declarative memory to
advantageous decision-making on the Iowa Gambling
Task (IGT). A group study, in which the measurement of
psychophysiology during the task necessitated a 10-sec
delay between card selections, found that amnesic
participants (n=6) failed to develop a preference for
advantageous decks over disadvantageous decks
(Gutbrod et al., 2006), whereas a case study (where
psychophysiology was not measured and no delay
between card selections occurred) showed that the
amnesic patient developed the normal preference for
advantageous decks (Turnbull & Evans, 2006). We sought
to resolve these discrepant findings by examining IGT
performances in five patients (1 woman) with profound
amnesia (WMS-III General Memory Index M = 64) and
bilateral hippocampal damage caused by anoxia/HSE. In
one administration of the IGT, psychophysiology
measurements interposed a 6-sec delay between card
selections. In a second administration 1 to 7 years later (M
= 4 years), no delay between card selections was
interposed. While age-, sex- and education-matched
healthy comparison participants showed significant
learning with a gradual preference for advantageous
decks, amnesic patients, irrespective of IGT administration
condition and of etiology of amnesia, failed to develop this
preference. These findings strongly discount the
possibility that the delay between card selections explains
why amnesic participants fail to learn in the IGT, and
suggest a significant role for medial temporal lobe
declarative memory systems in the type of complex
decision-making tapped by the IGT. Grant support from
DT: NIDA R01 DA022549 and NINDS P01 NS19632

E36
MOTIVATIONAL CONTEXT AND INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES
MODULATE
THE
NEURAL
UNDERPINNINGS OF RISK Hani D. Freeman, University
of Texas at Austin; Jennifer S. Beer, University of Texas at
Austin – Not all risk is created equal. Some risks provide
the potential for some benefit whereas others are purely
for thrills. Extant neural research has identified a neural
system that supports risk by focusing on gambling tasks
where risk has some potential for benefit (e.g., monetary
gain). Is this system also activated when risk is taken in a
context with no benefit except thrills? We conducted an
fMRI study to assess differences in adaptive (e.g.,
potential for benefit) and maladaptive risk-taking
behavior. Participants were presented with scenarios that
were equally risky but had the potential for adaptive
benefits (e.g., taking an experimental drug that might kill
you or save your life) or potential for thrills (e.g., taking a
recreational drug that might kill you or give you a
pleasurable experience). Consistent with previous neural
research on risk, the study found that adaptive risks were
associated with significant activation in caudate, insula,
and middle temporal gyrus. However, risks that were
taken purely for thrills engaged different neural systems

E38
THE INFLUENCE OF PRIOR RECORD ON MORAL
JUDGMENT Dorit Kliemann, University of Bremen,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Liane Young,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Jonathan Scholz,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Rebecca Saxe,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology – Repeat offenders are
commonly given more severe sentences than first-time

23

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

offenders for the same violations. Though this practice
makes intuitive sense, the theory behind escalating
penalties is disputed in both legal and economic theories.
Here we investigate folk intuitions concerning the moral
and intentional status of actions performed by people with
positive versus negative prior records, using behavioural
and neuroimaging methods (functional magnetic
resonance imaging). We hypothesized that prior record
would modulate both moral judgment and mental state
reasoning. Subjects first engaged in an economic game
with fair (positive prior record) and unfair (negative prior
record) competitors and then read descriptions of their
competitors' actions that resulted in either positive or
negative outcomes. The descriptions left the competitors'
mental states unstated. We found that subjects judged
actions producing negative outcomes as more
"intentional" and more "blameworthy" when performed
by unfair competitors. Although explicit mental state
evaluation was not required, moral judgments in this case
were accompanied by increased activation in brain regions
associated with mental state reasoning, including
predominantly the right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ).
The magnitude of RTPJ activation was correlated with
individual subjects' behavioural responses to unfair play
in the game. These results thus provide insight for both
legal theory and moral psychology.

arrows. For the schematic faces the NC group showed a
validity effect at 200ms but not at 600ms. The opposite
was true in the WS group, which showed a validity effect
at the longer SOA. Our findings suggest that orienting to
gaze is preserved in individuals with WS, although
proceeds on a different time-course which may be
constrained by domain-general processing efficiency.
E40
OXYTOCIN
ENHANCES
POSITIVE
VERSUS
NEGATIVE
EMOTIONAL
INFORMATION
PROCESSING IN HEALTHY MALE VOLUNTEERS
Martina Di Simplicio, University of Siena; Rachel MasseyChase, Warneford Hospital; Philip J. Cowen, Warneford
Hospital; Catherine J. Harmer, Warneford Hospital –
Rationale: Animal studies have shown the role of oxytocin
in affiliation and attachment and recent evidence suggests
that oxytocin is also involved in human models of
approach behaviour, possibly by modulating the
processing of emotionally valenced stimuli. Although
oxytocin administration has been reported to decrease
neural responses to facial emotional information, the
effects on a range of behavioral measures of emotional
processing are still discussed. Objective: The aim of this
study was to investigate whether intranasally
administered oxytocin affects the processing of positive
and negative affective information in healthy male
volunteers across tasks measuring attention, perception
and memory. Methods: Twenty-nine male healthy
volunteers were randomly allocated to receive a single
dose of oxytocin nasal spray (24 UI) or placebo. Fifty
minutes later, participants completed a battery of
psychological tests measuring emotional processing (facial
expression recognition, emotional memory, attentional dot
probe). Mood and subjective experience were also
assessed. Results: A single-dose of intranasally
administered oxytocin slowed reaction time to correctly
identify fearful facial expressions and reduced the
misclassification of positive emotions as negative ones.
Volunteers receiving oxytocin were also more likely to
recall words describing positive characteristics. These
effects occurred in the absence of significant differences in
subjective ratings of mood and anxiety. Conclusions:
Oxytocin modulates emotion processing in healthy male
volunteers. This action may contribute to the emerging
role of the neuropeptide in promoting affiliative and
approach behaviour, by reducing the salience of
potentially ambiguous and threatening social stimuli and
promoting a processing bias towards positive stimuli.

E39
ORIENTING OF ATTENTION TO GAZE AND
ARROW CUES IN WILLIAMS SYNDROME Alex Fine,
Boston University School of Medicine; Daniela Plesa-Skwerer,
Boston University School of Medicine; Robert Joseph, Boston
University School of Medicine; Lucia Ciciolla, Boston
University School of Medicine; Helen Tager-Flusberg, Boston
University School of Medicine – Previous studies show
reflexive attentional orienting to gaze in typically
developing individuals. Orienting of attention has not
been systematically examined in Williams syndrome (WS),
a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild
mental retardation, impairments in spatial ability, and
heightened social interest. Measuring attentional
processes engaged in orienting tasks may elucidate lowlevel processing of social information in this population.
We administered a standard cueing paradigm with nonpredictive, centrally-presented schematic faces and arrows
at two stimulus onset asynchronies (200, 600 SOA) to
individuals with WS and to mentally age-matched normal
controls (NC). Manual response time to target location on
correct trials was measured to assess effects of cuedirection on attention deployment. An ANOVA with cuetype and SOA as within-subjects variables yielded
significant group by cue-type and group by SOA
interactions. In the arrow condition, WS showed a validity
effect at both SOAs; NCs showed the effect only at the
shorter SOA. The validity effect for arrows was of a
greater magnitude for WS individuals overall than for
controls. These results suggest that WS may have more
difficulty using top-down attention control mechanisms to
disengage from the "rule-like" directional quality of the

E41
SENSITIVITY TO FAIRNESS AND INTENTIONS OF
OTHERS IN THE ULTIMATUM GAME AMONG
PATIENTS WITH VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL
LESIONS S.G. Shamay-Tsoory, University of Haifa; R.
Suleiman, University of Haifa; R. Gohary, University of Haifa;,
G. Hirshberger, University of Haifa; J. Aharon-Peretz,
University of Haifa – In the Ultimatum Game (UG) two
players split a sum of money. The proposer decides about

24

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

the division of the money while the responder can accept
or reject this offer. It has been shown that identical offers
in an UG trigger vastly different rejection rates depending
on the other offers available to the proposer. Thus, healthy
responders tend to reject a given offer with an unequal
distribution of material payoffs if the proposer could have
proposed a more equitable offer. This suggests that
healthy responders take into account the intentions and
perspective of the proposer and not only the distributive
consequences. Here, we investigate whether perspective
taking defects following localized ventromedial prefrontal
(VM) lesions are associated with a different decision
making. To examine this hypothesis 8 patients with VM
damage and 18 healthy controls (HC) participated as
responders in the UG with twelve fake proposers.
Participants had to either accept or reject offers of 2/8 NIS
(2 for them and 8 for the proposer), which was paired with
one of four different offers (5/5, 4/6, 2/8, 8/2). Whereas
HC rejected the offered 2/8 when it was paired with 4/6
than 5/5, patients showed the opposite pattern of
preferences. Furthermore, in the VM group, ratings in a
perspective taking scale correlated with rejection rates,
such that poorer perspective taking was associated with
higher rejection rate and lower total monetary gains. This
suggests that impaired perspective taking may account for
these patients' aberrant economic conduct.

magnitude and delay were fixed and the animal was
required to choose the target shown in the same color as
the fixation target. This suggests that prefrontal cortex and
caudate nucleus play similar roles during inter-temporal
choice.
E43
TEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF AFFECT IN THE
YOUNG AND AGING HUMAN BRAIN Alyson M.
Negreira, Massachusetts General Hospital; Stephanie M.
Carpenter, Massachusetts General Hospital; Mariann R.
Weierich, Massachusetts General Hospital; Christopher Sege,
Boston College; Elizabeth A. Kensinger, Boston College;
Christopher I. Wright, Massachusetts General Hospital; Lisa F.
Barrett, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston College –
Affect, the neurophysiologic barometer of an individual's
relationship to the environment, depends on three crucial
properties: hedonic valence, arousal, and novelty.
Previous neuroimaging experiments typically studied one
or two properties of affect and disregarded the temporal
characteristics of each property. The current study sought
to simultaneously assess the effects of valence, arousal and
novelty during affective processing and to investigate the
temporal characteristics of these affective properties using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Five
young and ten healthy elderly participants viewed
International Affective Picture System (IAPS) pictures
within an event-related fMRI design. Twelve distinct
groups of IAPS pictures were created based on the
dimensions of hedonic valence, arousal, and novelty (e.g..
a Familiar/High Arousal/Negative group, etc). An
individual participant anatomic region of interest (ROI)
approach identified voxels active to the task and percent
signal change measures were extracted from these voxels.
We have observed that the amygdala is differentially
responsive to valence, arousal, and novelty across the time
course of the hemodynamic response. Peak amygdala
responses to novelty, valence and arousal occurred 6 to 8
seconds after stimulus onset. As predicted, the arousal
and novelty responses were similar for both age groups. A
positivity effect was not observed in elderly vs young
amygdala responses, although elderly participants were
significantly less responsive to negative compared to
positive pictures 12 to 14 seconds in the hemodynamic
response, whereas no difference was observed for young
participants at that point in the time course.

E42
ROLE OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND STRIATUM
IN INTER-TEMPORAL CHOICE Xinying Cai,Yale
University School of Medicine; Soyoun Kim, Yale University
School of Medicine; Daeyeol Lee, Yale University School of
Medicine – Humans and animals sometimes forsake a large
delayed reward and settle for a smaller but more
immediate reward, suggesting that the subjective value of
reward diminishes according to its delay. Neuroimaging
studies have identified a network of cortical and
subcortical areas involved in this so-called inter-temporal
choice. In addition, single-neuron recording studies have
shown that the individual neurons in the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex of rhesus monkeys often combine
information about the magnitude and immediacy of
reward and encode temporally discounted value of the
reward expected from a particular choice. To better
understand the role of the cortico-basal-ganglia loop in
inter-temporal choice, we recorded the activity of neurons
in the caudate nucleus of a rhesus monkey while it
performed an oculomotor inter-temporal choice task. The
reward magnitude and delay for each target were
manipulated randomly across different trials and signaled
symbolically using visual cues. Using a regression
analysis, we found that approximately 40% of the caudate
neurons significantly modulated their activity according
to the temporally discounted value of a given target. In
addition, many neurons changed their activity similarly in
response to an increase in reward magnitude and a
decrease in reward delay for the same target. Signals
related to the temporally discounted values were
attenuated during a control task, in which reward

E44
EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY NETWORK VARIES BY PERSONAL
INVOLVEMENT Keely A. Muscatell, Boston College,
MGH/MIT/HMS Anithoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging; Donna Rose Addis, Harvard University,
MGH/MIT/HMS Anithoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging; Elizabeth A. Kensinger, Dept. of Psychology, Boston
College, MGH/MIT/HMS Anithoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging – Autobiographical memory (AM) is an
important part of everyday life, and neuroimaging
technology has enabled researchers to characterize the

25

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

neural network underlying AM retrieval. In the present
study, we examined how one characteristic of AM,
personal
involvement,
modulated
the
effective
connectivity of the AM-retrieval network. Thirteen
members of the Boston College Women's Ice Hockey team
underwent a functional neuroimaging scan while they
recalled game details from the 2006-2007 hockey season.
Following the scan, participants rated their memories on a
number of dimensions, including their personal
involvement with each of the game events recalled.
Memories were divided into "high involvement" (e.g.,
recalling when you scored a goal) and "low involvement"
memories (e.g., recalling watching from the bench as your
teammate scored a goal). Using structural equation
modeling, we examined how the effective connectivity
among regions of the AM network differed based on
personal involvement. Results indicated that, during
retrieval of high involvement events, there was a strong,
positive connection between the right amygdaloidhippocampal region and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC),
and also between the left hippocampus and mPFC. During
retrieval of low involvement events, there was an even
stronger
positive
connection
between
the
left
hippocampus and mPFC but also a negative connection
between the right amygdaloid-hippocampal region and
mPFC. Thus, though there appears to be a similar amount
of overall connectivity between medial-temporal lobe
structures and mPFC regardless of personal involvement,
the influence of the right amygdaloid-hippocampal region
on other regions differs based upon the personal
involvement of a retrieved memory.

automatically make sense of action in terms of goal-driven
mental states. This proposition is consistent with central
findings of AIT that individuals prefer high-levels of
action identification. Moreover, the data suggests that selfregulation-which requires low-level action identificationmay require the suppression of the natural tendency to
construe actions on high-levels of identification.
E46
EFFECTS OF AGE ON DETECTION OF EMOTIONAL
INFORMATION: EVIDENCE FROM BEHAVIORAL,
EYE-GAZE, AND NEURAL EXPERIMENTS Christina M.
Leclerc, Boston College; Elizabeth A. Kensinger, Boston College
– Emotion has been found to play a large role in the
prioritization of attention to information in our
environments. Although young and older adults prioritize
processing of emotional information, there often is an agerelated valence reversal in the processing of emotional
stimuli. Previous research indicates that older adults
remember more positive compared to negative
information (Carstensen & Mikels, 2005), and
neurobiological evidence (Leclerc & Kensinger, in press)
indicates an age-related reversal in the valence of
information eliciting activity within the medial prefrontal
cortex (MPFC). The current research examined age
differences in affective processing using a visual search
task paradigm with behavioral, eye-tracking, and
neuroimaging methodologies. Behavioral and eyetracking results indicate that, compared with neutral
images, both age groups were faster to detect, and looked
longer at, high arousal emotional images. Despite this
general similarity in task performance, neuroimaging
results indicate an age-related reversal in MPFC
activation, with detection of negative compared to positive
targets activating the MPFC more for young adults, and
detection of positive compared to negative images
activating the MPFC more for older adults. Together these
results provide evidence not only that the detection
benefit for emotional material is preserved across the
lifespan, but also that the previously observed age-related
reversal in neural activation can exist even on tasks that
require only relatively automatic processing of emotional
information.

E45
AN FMRI STUDY OF DIFFERENT LEVELS OF
CONSTRUAL IN ACTION IDENTIFICATION Robert P.
Spunt, UCLA; Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA; Ajay B.
Satpute, UCLA – Action Identification Theory (AIT;
Vallacher & Wegner, 1986) posits that the same action
(e.g., "brushing teeth") can be accurately described on
different levels of construal, with low-levels focusing on
how the action is performed (e.g., "gripping the
toothbrush") and high-levels focusing on "why" the action
is performed (e.g., "maintaining dental hygiene").
Moreover, AIT posits that individuals tend to prefer highlevel identifications of actions. The current study sought to
explore the neural correlates of different levels of
construal in action identification. 18 subjects (9 male, 9
female) underwent fMRI while providing descriptions of
5-second video clips of a male actor performing various
everyday actions. Subjects passively watched each clip
and then described them on three levels of construal: Lowlevel (How is he doing it?), Basic-level (What is he doing?),
and High-level (Why is he doing it?). Preliminary analyses
suggest that, as level of construal decreases from high to
low, activity in neural regions associated with mentalizing
and motivation, including the dorsomedial prefrontal
cortex, precuneus, insula, and ventral striatum, decrease
as well. The data suggest that low-level action
identification requires the suppression of processes that

E47
UNFORGETTABLY UNFAIR: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF MEMORY FOLLOWING SOCIAL
ECONOMIC EXCHANGE Luke Chang, University of
Arizona; Mascha Van't Wout; University of Arizona; Katia
Harle, University of Arizona; Alan Sanfey, University of
Arizona – Previous research in the domain of social
cognitive neuroscience has demonstrated that people are
extremely sensitive to social norms of fairness and
cooperation norms, and indeed often experience a
negative emotional reaction when these social preferences
are violated by another intentional human agent.
However, less is currently known about how these norm
violations affect subsequent social perception and
decisions. To investigate the nature of the neural response

26

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

to the detection of cheaters, we conducted an experiment
in which participants played a single-shot Ultimatum
Game with many partners while undergoing functional
magnetic resonance imaging. In this game participants
were presented with proposals ranging from $1 to $5, all
divisions of a $10 pot. In addition to the Ultimatum Game,
participants also completed a recognition memory task in
the scanner, in which they were presented with a series of
faces and asked to rate their confidence that they had
played the Ultimatum Game with this partner. In
actuality, half of the faces had been previously
encountered, while half were novel distracter faces.
Behaviorally, participants were more accurate in
discriminating between faces that had previously made
unfair offers ($1-2) compared to those that had made fair
offers ($5). The imaging results indicate that a network
that has previously received attention for its association
with social processing and as a default-mode network
may underlie this phenomenon. This suggests that the
ability to discriminate cheaters appears to recruit regions
that are important in inferring negative intentions.

E49
ENCODING OF GAINS AND LOSSES IN PRIMATE
FRONTAL CORTEX AND STRIATUM Hyojung Seo, Yale
University School of Medicine; Xinying Cai, Yale University
School of Medicine; Daeyeol Lee, Yale University School of
Medicine – Decision making in humans is frequently based
on the evaluation of symbolic events, such as monetary
gains and losses. Previous neuroimaging studies have
shown that a broad cortical and subcortical network is
involved in the anticipation and evaluation of gains and
losses. However, little is known about the neuronal and
circuit mechanisms for processing information about
abstract gains and losses. We developed a novel decisionmaking task for rhesus monkeys in which visual tokens
are used as conditioned reinforcement. A variable number
of tokens in the form of red disks presented at the center
of the computer screen served as conditioned
reinforcement. Upon the extinction of a central fixation
target, the animal freely chose between two peripheral
stimuli by making a saccade. A token was stochastically
added or removed according to the payoff matrix of a
biased matching pennies game. Juice reward was
delivered automatically when 6 tokens were cumulated.
We recorded single-neuron activity from the dorsomedial
frontal cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex as well as the caudate nucleus.
Neural activity in all of these areas was modulated by
gains and losses not only in the current trial but also in the
previous trials. These signals were represented most
strongly in the medial cortical areas. Furthermore, signals
related to gains and losses were independently encoded
across population in each brain area. These results suggest
that the process of updating the animal's behavioral
strategies according to conditioned reinforcement is
mediated by the frontal cortex-basal-ganglia network.

E48
GOALS IN ACTION: NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE
BEHAVIORAL INHIBITION AND ACTIVATION
SYSTEMS DURING GOAL PURSUIT Elliot T. Berkman,
UCLA Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA – How do we
overcome the temptations that arise in the course of goal
pursuit, and what are the neural systems underlying this
process? The present line of research examines the role of
the behavioral activation and inhibition systems (BAS and
BIS, respectively) in goal pursuit in general and inhibition
of temptations in particular. Our model proposes that BAS
facilitates goal pursuit broadly, whereas the BIS relates to
inhibition of goal-irrelevant temptations or impulses. On a
neural level, trait BAS is hypothesized to relate to regions
associated with action planning and motivation during
goal pursuit, reward regions following goal attainment,
and be left-lateralized; and trait BIS is expected to relate to
activation in regions involved in conflict detection and
inhibition, and be right-lateralized. Importantly, neural
activity in these regions during goal pursuit is expected to
mediate behavioral outcomes. Brain activity was
measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) while participants completed a motivational
reverse-contingency task that required regulation of goalirrelevant prepotent responses on some trials. In support
of the hypotheses, regions associated with action planning
(dorsolateral PFC) and reward (ventral striatum) were
associated with success across all participants, particularly
for those higher in trait BAS. Likewise, regions associated
with conflict detection and regulation (cingulate cortex,
ventrolateral PFC) were selectively activated on trials
when regulation was necessary, and particularly for
participants higher in trait BIS. These results support a
dynamic model of goal pursuit that involves interacting
motivational and cognitive processes that are modulated
by individual differences in BIS and BAS.

E50
IDENTIFICATION OF THE AREAS OF THE PAINPROCESSING NETWORK CORRELATED WITH
INDUCED NEGATIVE MOOD: AN FMRI STUDY
Chantal Berna, University of Oxford; Siri Leknes, University of
Oxford; Emily Holmes, University of Oxford; Guy Goodwin,
University of Oxford; Irene Tracey, University of Oxford –
Goals of the study While there is an increasing
understanding of the central pathways of pain perception,
their modulation by cognitive and emotional processes is
still under investigation. Our study aims to identify the
neural correlates of negative mood during an
experimental pain procedure. Methods In the functional
Magnetic Resonance scanner (fMRI), subjects were
exposed to 21 second heat pain bursts on a patch of skin
pre-treated with capsaicin (0.075%), following a negative
and a neutral mood induction using Velten-type
statements and music (pseudorandomised order). Each
stimulus was preceded by a mood booster, in order to
keep the mood state steady. After the stimulus, subjects
rated the unpleasantness of the stimulus on a Visual
Analogue Scale, as well as the prevalence of
catastrophizing. Results In a preliminary group of n= 12,

27

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

the contrast <mood booster negative-neutral> confirms a
negative mood induction with a unique activation in the
subgenual anterior cingular cortex (sACC). A functional
connectivity analysis between subjects' activity in the
sACC and activity during pain processing revealed
correlations with the controlateral posterior insula, the
periacqueductal gray, and bilaterally the anterior insula,
amygdala,
hippocampus,
ACC,
and
precuneus.
Conclusion These preliminary results highlight areas
involved in central pain processing which are affected by
mood. These areas, known to be important in emotional
processing, could be responsible for altered pain
perception during negative mood. Further analysis on a
larger sample should lead to a better understanding of the
role of these neuronal circuits, and their involvement in
mood and pain.

Tilburg University, Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; J.
Gräzes, Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, INSERM
U742, DÇpartement d'Etudes Cognitives, Ecole Normale
SupÇrieure, Paris – Recently, it has been suggested that the
ability to understand others' emotional behaviour may be
sustained by automatic simulation of actions observed.
Simulation of actions with the goal of representing the
action may be all that is needed to understand the type of
action but when the action is performed with a clear
emotional overtone other neural substrates may matter.
Typically, perception of other's threat may recruit defence
mechanisms such as involved in the experience of fear or
anger. Using event related fMRI we identified threat
specific activity associated with the observation of videos
of actors performing fear or anger expressions as opposed
to neutral ones. 16 healthy right-handed volunteers
participated to the study and were instructed to categorize
the expressions. Images were acquired on a 3T magnet
and a RFX analysis was implemented at the group level
using SPM2. As predicted, expressions of threat compared
to neutral videos triggered enhanced activity in the
temporal cortex (MTV5, fusiform, STS and Amygdala) as
well as in the prefrontal cortex (orbitofrontal cortex,
Broca's area and medial superior frontal gyrus).
Furthermore, recognition performance for fear expressions
but not anger ones correlated with activity in bilateral
amygdala while anger expressions elicited broader
activations than fear ones in the left amygdala, the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, the orbitofrontal cortex
(BA47) and temporal cortices. These results suggest that in
a dynamic visual context, direct threat signals from angry
body expressions are more prone to elicit emotional
responses in the amygdala and the orbitofrontal cortex
than fear ones.

E51
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX ACTIVATION
PREDICTS DEGREE OF SAME-RACE BIAS IN
EMPATHIC RESPONSE TO PERCEIVED PAIN Vani A.
Mathur,
Northwestern
University;
Tokiko
Harada,
Northwestern University; Trixie Lipke, Northwestern
University; Joan Y. Chiao, Northwestern University – Group
selection observed in altruistic behavior suggests that
people are more likely to respond to distress signals, such
as pain or fear, when expressed by people from their own
social group. Prior neuroimaging studies have shown that
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and bilateral anterior
insula (AI) are involved in pain processing and empathic
response. However, whether social group membership,
such as race, affects neural responses related to pain
perception and empathy remains unknown. Here we used
functional magnetic resonance imaging at 3T to examine
the neural bases of a same-race bias in empathy to
perceived pain. During scanning, eleven AfricanAmerican participants viewed complex visual scenes of
African-American or Caucasian-American targets in either
painful or neutral situations and indicated how much
empathy they had for the target (i.e., how badly they felt)
using a four-point Likert scale. Participants' behavioral
ratings indicated significantly greater empathy for samerace relative to other-race targets in pain. Greater
activation in ACC and left AI was found in response to
same-race pain targets relative to other-race pain targets.
Furthermore, degree of activation in ACC was positively
and significantly correlated with degree of same-race bias
in self-reported empathy. These findings demonstrate that
race affects degree of empathic response to perceived pain
and activity within ACC predicts the extent to which a
person feels greater empathy for a same- or other-race
target in pain.

E53
MENTALIZING UNDER UNCERTAINTY: GREATER
MEDIAL
PREFRONTAL
INVOLVEMENT
IN
UNCONSTRAINED MENTAL INFERENCE Adrianna C.
Jenkins, Harvard University; Jason P. Mitchell, Harvard
University – Research on the neural basis of social
cognition has generated contradictory empirical findings
with respect to the role of the medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) in mentalizing (i.e., the ability to infer the mental
states and personality traits of others). Whereas some
lines of research have identified MPFC as the locus of
mentalizing activity, other lines of research have
concluded that MPFC is not necessary, or is less important
than other regions, for inferring the contents of other
minds. Critically, research along these different lines has
operationalized mentalizing in different ways, opening
the possibility that such inconsistencies have arisen
because different tasks have tapped into different
subcomponent processes of mentalizing. Such tasks have
differed along two potentially-important, but so far
confounded, dimensions: their 1) content (typically, belief
versus preference), and 2) degree of constraint, i.e., the
degree to which perceivers’ inferences are logically

E52
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERCEIVING DYNAMIC
SIGNALS OF THREAT IN BODILY EXPRESSIONS OF
ANGER AND FEAR S. Pichon, Laboratoire de Neurosciences
Cognitives, INSERM U742, DÇpartement d'Etudes
Cognitives, Ecole Normale SupÇrieure, Paris; B. de Gelder, .,

28

Saturday, June 7, 4:15 PM – 5:30 PM

Poster Session E

dictated by the information provided. The current study
manipulated both dimensions systematically in a single
set of participants in order to establish the effects of
content and constraint on MPFC recruitment during
mentalizing. Participants were scanned using FMRI while
making constrained and unconstrained inferences about
the beliefs and preferences of protagonists in short
vignettes. Activity in MPFC was moderated by the degree
of constraint on perceivers’ inferences. Specifically, MPFC
responded more during unconstrained inferences of both
types of content, suggesting MPFC-based processes are
engaged more during mental inferences that require the
construction of novel predictions from minimal
information than during logical reasoning from
established premises.
E54
DISTINCT
NEURAL
NETWORKS
SUPPORT
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY AND THEORY OF
MIND Jennifer Rabin, York University; Donald T. Stuss,
Rotman Research Institute, University of Toronto; Asaf Gilboa,
University of Haifa; R. Shayna Rosenbaum, York University,
Rotman Research Institute – Neuroimaging studies suggest
that self-referential processing during autobiographical
memory (AM) and theory of mind (ToM) for inferring
other people's mental states activate the same core
network of brain regions, but recent lesion data suggest
that the abilities are dissociable. We examined the
functional distinction between ToM and AM using a realworld 'family photos' test of mental state attribution, in
which AM and ToM conditions were closely matched with
respect to event content and vividness. Participants were
scanned with fMRI as they recollected their own mental
states while viewing past personal photos (AM condition),
and as they inferred others' mental states while viewing
strangers' photos (ToM condition). Analyses revealed a
common network of regions, including the left frontal
pole/paracingulate cortex, bilateral anterior and posterior
cingulate/retrosplenial cortex, bilateral precuneus, right
temporal pole, bilateral parahippocampal cortex, and left
angular gyrus. However, the conditions differed in terms
of strength and location of activations. Specifically,
activity within the entire network was greater during AM,
except for the left angular gyrus, which was greater
during ToM. Superior medial prefrontal cortex was
recruited in both conditions, but on the left during AM
and right during ToM. Moreover, right hippocampal
activation was unique to AM, whereas left superior
temporal gyrus activation was unique to ToM. The results
suggest that AM and ToM draw on overlapping, but not
identical, brain regions and processes, which may reflect
the difference between re-experiencing details of personal
episodes and recombining or generating novel details of
events experienced by others.

29

Poster Session H
H1
AUTOMATIC
OR
ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL?
NEURAL RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS
Charlene C. Wu, NIMH; Samantha L. Crowe, NIMH; Derek
G.V. Mitchell, NIMH, University of Western Ontario; R. James
R. Blair, NIMH – The extent to which activation of the
amygdala to emotional expressions occurs independent of
the availability of attentional resources (i.e., the degree to
which this activation is "automatic") remains debated. This
event-related fMRI study investigated the impact of
attentional load on the BOLD response to emotional
expressions. Participants were presented with composite
stimuli
consisting
of
semi-transparent
words
superimposed on neutral, fearful, and disgusted faces.
This manipulation held stimulus-driven features constant
across multiple levels of attentional load. Participants
made either (1) gender discriminations based on the face;
(2) case judgments based on the words; or (3) syllable
number judgments based on the words. A significant main
effect for processing load was found in prefrontal cortex,
parietal cortex, visual processing areas, amygdala, and
insula. Results indicate activation in attention-related
regions, such as dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and parietal
cortex, increased with greater attentional load. Critically,
enhanced activity in the amygdala and insula to emotional
expressions during low attentional load (gender
discriminations) was significantly reduced during higher
levels of attentional load (linguistic discriminations).
Collectively, these data support the view that processing
task-irrelevant
fearor
disgust-based
emotional
information is, like neutral information, subject to the
effects of attentional load and top-down control.
H2
ON THE WRONG SIDE OF THE TROLLEY TRACK:
ARE SOME LIVES VALUED MORE HIGHLY THAN
OTHERS? Mina Cikara, Princeton University; Rachel A.
Farnsworth, Princeton University; Lasana T. Harris, New York
University; Susan T. Fiske, Princeton University – Do people
value the lives of certain people more than others? Group
stereotypes can be organized into four clusters along the
dimensions warmth and competence (Fiske et al., 2002).
These dimensions create a high/low warmth X high/low
competence space that describes four broad and culturally
universal stereotype categories and the emotional
prejudices those categories elicit. Targets high on both
warmth and competence (e.g., students) elicit emotions
such as pride, whereas targets low on both (e.g., drug
addicts) elicit emotions such as disgust. Targets in the
mixed quadrants elicit ambivalent emotions; envy is
reserved for targets perceived as high in competence but
low in warmth (e.g., business professionals) and pity is
elicited by targets perceived as low in competence and
high in warmth (e.g., elderly). Participants' resolutions of
moral dilemmas in the fMRI scanner revealed that
stereotypes motivate people to value the lives of people

belonging to certain social categories more highly than
others. Warmth of the sacrificed target predicted
activation in a network previously associated with
processing personal moral dilemmas (Greene et al., 2001),
including the amygdala, posterior cingulate, precuneus,
STS, and mPFC, whereas perceived competence did not.
Simple contrasts revealed pride targets were driving the
main effect of warmth. Competence interacted with
warmth: Envied targets were associated with deactivation
of dACC, suggesting participants were least conflicted
about sacrificing them relative to the other 3 groups.
Finally, sacrificing disgust targets activated anterior
vmPFC, which has been associated with reward,
specifically reward from a social source.
H3
WHEN PAIN IS AVOIDED: MORE POSITIVE AFFECT
IN PESSIMISTS THAN IN OPTIMISTS Siri Leknes,
University of Oxford; Chantal Berna, University of Oxford;
Irene Tracey, University of Oxford – This study investigated
the effects of individual differences in dispositional
optimism/pessimism on the experience of relief following
threat of pain. The level of surprise at a rewarding (or
aversive) counterfactual outcome is thought to increase its
pleasantness (or unpleasantness). While optimism is
associated with increased well-being and life expectancy,
the pessimist's negative expectations may lead to
increased rewarding relief when these expectations are
violated. To test this hypothesis, 18 healthy volunteers
participated in a functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) study where a visual cue predicted intensely
painful thermal stimulation with 50% probability. A safety
cue signalled the relief condition where no heat was
applied. During the scan, subjects were also asked to
imagine rewarding or neutral scenarios (e.g. your
favourite meal or an airplane meal). Both the safety cue
and the pleasant scenarios were rated as highly pleasant.
Subjects also reported feeling dread during anticipation of
pain/relief. As predicted, pessimism correlated positively
with both dread and relief. This pattern was confirmed by
the fMRI data, which showed that relief-related activation
in the ventral striatum correlated with pessimism.
Supporting the link between pleasant relief and other
types of reward, we identified overlap between relief and
reward processing in the ventromedial prefrontal and
rostral anterior cingulate cortices. Furthermore, positive
correlations between with pleasantness ratings and
activation in ventral striatum were found for both the
relief and the reward processing contrasts. Overall, our
findings support a link between pessimism and pleasant
relief, suggesting that optimism is not the only route to
positive affect.
H4
TALKING TO GOD - PERSONAL PRAYER
ACTIVATES AREAS OF SOCIAL COGNITION Uffe
Schj_dt, University of Aarhus; Armin W. Geertz, University of

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

Aarhus; Hans St_dkilde-J_rgensen, Aarhus University
Hospital; Andreas Roepstorff, Aarhus University Hospital –
Religious experience has widely been considered a
uniform category in the experimental neuroscience
literature. In my paper I argue that religious practices like
secular practices are concrete actions that differ widely in
both cognitive content and corresponding neural
correlates. We do hypothesize that belief in supernatural
beings separates religious practice from secular
equivalents in the social cognitive domain, because
religious subjects consider gods to be real and capable of
reciprocating personal requests. We employed a two-bytwo design using fMRI to test our hypotheses on twenty
young Christian Protestants by measuring the BOLD
response during different types of prayer. Unlike
recitation of a formalized prayer, performing a personal
prayer activated a strong response in the temporopolar
region, the medial prefrontal cortex and the
temporoparietal junction. This result supports our
hypothesis that religious prayers are diverse cognitive
phenomena and that praying subjects activates the neural
substrates of social cognition, when engaging in a
personal prayer. In a main-effect analysis we also found a
highly significant regional increase of the BOLD response
in the caudate nucleus. This supports another hypothesis
that religious prayer as a form of frequently recurring
behaviour is capable of stimulating the dopaminergic
reward system in practicing individuals. It extends recent
research, which demonstrates a relation between
interpersonal trust and activation in the dopaminergic
system, to encompass also relations to abstract entities.

change (PSC) in the right TPJ was negatively correlated
with blame for accidental harm; higher PSC indicated less
blame assigned to those who harmed without believing
they would. The current study provides neural evidence
for ToM in judgments of both harm and help and reveals
differences in how ToM is specifically engaged.
H6
TO BET OR NOT TO BET? THE NE/ERN
ASSOCIATED WITH RISK TAKING CHOICES
Rongjun Yu, Peking University; Xiaolin Zhou, Peking
University, State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and
Learning, Beijing Normal University, Capital Normal
University – The functional significance of error-related
negativity (Ne/ERN), which occurs at approximately the
same time as erroneous responses, has been investigated
extensively using reaction time (RT) tasks. The error
detection theory assumes that the Ne/ERN reflects the
mismatch detected by comparing representations of the
intended and the actually performed actions. The conflict
monitoring theory asserts that the Ne/ERN reflects the
detection of response conflict between intended and
actually performed actions during response selection. In
this study, we employed a gambling task in which
participants were required to choose whether they would
take part in betting in each trial and they were presented
with gain or loss feedback in both the "to bet" and the "not
to bet" trials. The response-locked ERP magnitudes were
more negative for "to bet" than for "not to bet" choices for
both large and small stakes and were more negative for
choices involving large rather than small stakes. Dipole
source analysis localized the ERP responses to the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC). These findings suggest that ACC
may function as an early warning system that signals the
need for higher order cognitive control and alerts the
brain to prepare for the potential negative consequence
associated with the risky action.

H5
A ROLE FOR THEORY OF MIND IN JUDGING
HELPFUL VERSUS HARMFUL ACTIONS: AN FMRI
INVESTIGATION Liane Young, Harvard University; Rebecca
Saxe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology – When
evaluating the moral status of an action, we often consider
both the action's outcome as well as the agent's mental
state at the time of action. Previous studies of moral
judgment have focused on harmful actions, revealing a
critical role for brain regions that support "theory of mind"
(ToM), the capacity to represent the mental states (e.g.,
beliefs) of others. The current study systematically
investigates the role of ToM in judgments of both harmful
and helpful actions. Participants read vignettes concerning
harm and help in a 2x2 design: protagonists produced a
valenced outcome (harmful or helpful) or neutral
outcome, based on the belief that they would produce the
valenced or neutral outcome. Participants judged the
amount of blame and praise deserved by the protagonist
in the harm and help vignettes, respectively. The results
indicate a robust and selective role for the right temporoparietal junction (right TPJ), and to a lesser extent, left TPJ,
precuneus, and medial prefrontal cortex, in judgments of
both harm and help: for harm, discrimination on the basis
of belief was observed for neutral outcomes only; for help,
discrimination on the basis of belief was observed for
positive outcomes only. Furthermore, the percent signal

H7
NEURAL ACTIVATIONS FOR SELECTIVE MEMORY
WITHIN EMOTIONAL SCENES Jill D. Waring, Boston
College; Elizabeth A. Kensinger, Boston College, Athinoula A.
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging – Emotionally
arousing visual scenes are remembered better than neutral
scenes, but not all portions of emotional scenes are
remembered with the same accuracy. Although memory
for emotionally arousing items is enhanced relative to
neutral items within scenes, memory is often impaired for
peripheral background information contained within
emotional scenes. Numerous behavioral studies have
indicated that this trade-off effect is robustly present in
young adults. In this study, we investigated how the
neural processes engaged during encoding may explain
this trade-off effect. In an event-related fMRI study, we
showed young adults scenes containing positive, negative,
and neutral items placed upon neutral backgrounds.
Later, outside the scanner, participants completed a
surprise recognition memory test, with the items and
backgrounds from the scenes presented independently. A

31

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

subsequent memory design allowed us to measure the
neural response related to the trade-off, identifying the
neural activity that predicted both enhanced memory for
highly arousing items compared to neutral ones, and also
impairment in memory for their backgrounds relative to
neutral scenes. Conjunction analyses revealed activation
in the amygdala, medial prefrontal cortex, and
orbitofrontal cortex regions showed this pattern, likely
reflecting emotion-mediated allocation of attention. There
were also several areas activated within the fusiform that
showed this type of response, likely reflecting heightened
attention for the emotional elements within the scenes.
These results indicate that strong activation in emotion
and visual processing regions for highly emotionally
arousing scenes leads to good memory for emotionally
arousing scene items, yet to poor memory for their
background contexts.

only cognitive aspects but also "somatic" or emotional
signals play a role in decision-making (DM) processes.
Particularly, the somatic marker (SM) hypothesis
(Damasio, 1994) states that the reactivation of a somatic
state, allows to curtail the decision-making process which
would otherwise depend on a demanding cost-benefit
analysis of the various possible choices that could override
the processing skills and prevent a quick and appropriate
on-line decision. Clinical models of impaired decisional
processing can be useful to get a better insight in DM itself
along with allowing a better comprehension of
physiopathological mechanisms of emotional-behavioural
disorders. Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) could
represent a relevant clinical model for DM studies for its
emotional-behavioural and neurofunctional features.
Moreover
neuropsychological
studies
highlighted
impairment in DM tasks in OCD: patients were guided by
short time rewards in spite of long-term negative
consequences (Cavedini, 2002; Cavedini, 2006). We
investigated the presence of a connection between DM
performances and choice-related psychophysiological
responses, in order to identify a possible SM impairment
and its involvement in poor decisional abilities. We
analyzed skin conductance responses (SCRs) during the
Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) in an adult OCD group and a
healthy control group, measuring anticipatory and
posticipatory psychophysiological reactions to reward
and/or punishment cues. Preliminary results suggest that
OCD patients performed worse than normal controls and
all of them exhibited weaker SCRs responses when
pondering choices and after wins and losses. These results
support the role of an impaired emotional modulation in
OCD patients' DM.

H8
PREFERENCE OVER REWARD SEQUENCES AND
VIOLATION OF INDEPENDENCE ASSUMPTION IN
RHESUS MONKEYS Soyoun Kim, Yale University School of
Medicine; Daeyeol Lee, Yale University School of Medicine –
Commonly observed preference for immediate reward is
frequently accounted for by various models of temporal
discounting in which the subjective value or utility of
delayed reward is given by a decreasing function of
reward delay. In real life, however, choices are often made
among different temporal sequences of rewards and
penalties. Whereas models of temporal discounting
assume that the contribution of a particular outcome to the
preference of the entire outcome sequence is independent
of the outcomes available in other time steps, it has been
demonstrated that for people this independence
assumption is often violated. To investigate whether and
how this independence assumption is violated in other
primates, we trained two rhesus monkeys in a novel
reward sequence choice task, in which the animals chose
between two reward sequences each providing a discrete
stream of rewards delivered in a series of five 2-s intervals.
The choice behavior of both animals was better fit by a
hyperbolic, rather than exponential, discount function.
Moreover, when a particular pattern of reward was added
to a pair of reward sequences, the animal's preference was
systematically altered, indicating that the assumption of
consumption independence is violated. In particular, a
relatively large reward added to a particular time step
increased the weights given to the rewards in nearby time
steps. These results suggest that monkeys evaluate the
value of reward in a context-dependent manner according
to the temporal pattern of the overall reward sequence.

H10
THE NEGATIVITY BIAS IN ECONOMIC DECISIONMAKING: THE ROLE OF THE VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX Samantha M. Mowrer, The Ohio
State University; Amanda Kesek, University of Minnesota
Institute of Child Development; William A. Cunningham, The
Ohio State University – According to Prospect Theory
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) and the Evaluative Space
Model (Cacioppo & Berntson, 1994), negative information
is weighted heavily in decisions and evaluations, a
phenomenon known as the negativity bias (Ito et al., 1998).
The current study examined this bias in the activity of
regions previously implicated in decisional processes,
namely areas of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
thought to provide computations of expected value. Using
fMRI, participants completed a task during which they
chose to accept or reject gambles that simultaneously
varied in the probability and magnitude of both gains and
losses. Trials consisted of two phases. During the
decision/anticipation phase, participants saw the stimuli
and made a response, while during the outcome phase
participants received feedback regarding the outcome of
the trial. Results showed that an area of the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) responded in a manner
consistent with the negativity bias, exhibiting greater

H9
EMOTIONAL
MODULATION
OF
DECISION
MAKING IN OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE BEHAVIOUR
Cavedini Paolo, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, SRT Hospital;
Zorzi Claudia, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University; Bellodi
Laura, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, SRT Hospital, VitaSalute San Raffaele University – Literature suggests that not

32

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

activity related to context-dependent negativity.
Specifically, during the outcome phase, greater VMPFC
activity was associated with negative aspects of the
stimulus when participants accepted the gamble, but
positive aspects of the stimulus when participants rejected
the gamble. Given the context, accepting a loss and
rejecting a gain are both negative experiences. The results
of this study suggest that the VMPFC may represent an
affective valuation function involved in the computation
of subjective expected utility rather than expected value,
as this area was implicated in the negativity bias.
However, negativity is situationally determined.

that rTMS over the dorsolateral PFC can modulate
attention to emotional stimuli. Moreover, personality traits
might be relevant in disclosing an anterior asymmetry
effect, consistent with a diathesis model. Objective: The
aim of this study was to investigate whether high
frequency rTMS over the right and left dorsolateral PFC
interferes with a facial expression recognition task in
healthy subjects who differ on "phobic" personality scores.
Methods: Twenty healthy volunteers completed an
emotional faces recognition task under baseline condition,
sham rTMS and online 20Hz rTMS over the right and left
PFC in randomized order. Reaction time and accuracy
were measured. Mood state and personality style were
assessed using the PANAS and the Personality Meaning
Questionnaire. Results: A significant interaction between
stimulation condition, emotion and personality was
found. Subjects high on "phobic" personality scores
showed a tendency to make more errors in recognizing
fearful faces when rTMS was applied on the right PFC. An
opposite tendency appeared for recognizing angry faces,
with more errors during rTMS over the left PFC, without
significant differences in subjective mood ratings.
Conclusions: High frequency rTMS over the dorsolateral
PFC can modulate the recognition of emotional faces. The
effect of rTMS interference seems to be dependent on
subjects' personality traits, showing a possible asymmetry
in the processing of fearful and angry facial stimuli.

H11
PROSODY INFLUENCES THE LISTENER'S ONLINE
REPRESENTATION OF THE SPEAKER'S THOUGHTS
Evelina Fedorenko, MIT; Lillia Cherkasskiy, Stanford
University; Steven Piantadosi, MIT; Rebecca Saxe, MIT – A
critical question in social cognition concerns whether
people represent others' utterances as simply their
meanings or as the others' beliefs about their meanings.
Whereas representing utterances as others' beliefs may be
socially-relevant, it is also computationally intensive. We
hypothesized that the probability of representing the
speaker's utterances as beliefs depends on how salient the
speaker is in the listener's mind. We manipulated the
speaker's saliency by comparing two prosodic contour of
the phrase "I think" which preceded the speaker's
utterances in naturalistic dialogs: the version where both
words were unstressed and the version where "I" was
stressed. Speakers use the latter prosodic contour to draw
attention to their own opinion, in contrast to the opinions
of others. We therefore reasoned that this prosodic
contour should increase the speaker's saliency. In the
behavioral study, we found that people infer greater
confidence of the speaker (but do not themselves form
more confident opinions) when "I" is stressed. In the fMRI
study we first identified brain regions that have been
implicated in forming a representation of another's
thoughts. We then compared the activation in these
regions to "I think" sentences with different prosodic
contours. Consistent with our hypothesis, these regions
show a higher response to the condition where "I" is
stressed than to exactly the same sentence if both words
are unstressed. This is the first demonstration of the
regions that have been implicated in representing others'
thoughts interpreting utterances as others' beliefs in
naturalistic dialogs.

H13
MESOLIMBIC REGIONS ARE DIFFERENTIALLY
SENSITIVE TO MAGNITUDE AND DELAY IN A
DELAY-DISCOUNTING TASK K. Ballard, Stanford
University; B. Knutson, Stanford University – "Delay
discounting" refers to a phenomenon in which individuals
discount the value of delayed gains relative to immediate
gains. Prior functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
studies have documented greater mesolimbic activation
when people consider choices involving immediate gains
versus delayed gains (McClure et al, 2004) and have also
related mesolimbic activation to individuals' value of
delayed gains (Kable & Glimcher, 2007). However,
researchers have not yet determined how mesolimbic
activation represents the magnitude and delay of gains,
and whether this activation can be used to predict
individuals' preferences for delayed versus immediate
outcomes. We scanned 16 subjects (8 female) with FMRI
(GE 1.5 T scanner, voxel size = 4 mm cubic, TR = 2000
msec, spiral in/out pulse sequence) as they engaged in a
delay-discounting task. A novel temporally distributed
task design separated presentation of information related
to the immediate gain, magnitude of the delayed gain,
delay of the delayed gain, and choice. Findings indicated
that magnitude of the delayed gain elicited proportional
activation in nucleus accumbens (NAcc), medial prefrontal
cortex (MPFC), and anterior and posterior cingulate, while
delay of the delayed gain elicited proportional activation
in DLPFC, MPFC and cingulate. Logistic regression
analyses further indicated that NAcc and vMPFC
activation in response to magnitude and cingulate

H12
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF PERSONALITY TRAIT
ON FACIAL EXPRESSION RECOGNITION. AN RTMS
INVESTIGATION Martina Di Simplicio, University of Siena;
Vincenzo Falzarano, University of Siena; Alberto De Capua,
University of Siena; Simone Rossi, University of Siena; –
Rationale: It has been suggested that avoidance-related
emotions are preferentially controlled by the right
prefrontal cortex (PFC), whereas approach-related
emotions by the left PFC. Previous studies have shown

33

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

activation in response to delay predicted choice of the
delayed gain. These findings suggest that activation in
ventral mesolimbic regions is sensitive to magnitude,
while activation in dorsal regions is sensitive to delays
during delay-discounting. Support Contributed By: NIH
Grant AG024957-03

more accurate and faster at identifying, recognizing, and
remembering faces and persons of their own as opposed
to other ages. This "own-age bias" suggests that the age of
a face constitutes one important factor that influences how
a face is processed. The present experiment is aimed at
investigating the electrophysiological correlates of the
own-age bias. In the context of a gender discrimination
task, younger participants (age range: 18-29 yrs.) were
presented with pictures of younger and older individuals'
faces with neutral facial expressions. A comparison of the
event-related potentials elicited by the younger and older
faces revealed: (1) an enhanced positivity for older than
younger faces over frontal and central scalp sites
(FP1/FPz/FP2, F3/Fz/F4, FC3/FCz/FC4, C3/Cz/C4)
peaking at 212 msec, (2) greater positivity over right
parietal and temporal sites (CP4/P4, TP8/T6) peaking at
336 msec for older opposed to younger faces, and (3) a
larger P3 over midline central and parietal sites
(Cz/CPz/Pz; C4/CP4/P4) peaking at 444 msec for older
compared to younger faces. In addition to the gender
discrimination task, participants demonstrated a
preference for pictures of younger adults on the Age IAT.
The results are discussed in the context of the neural
mechanisms underlying a processing advantage for ownage faces and the preference for young over old age and
negative aging stereotypes as demonstrated by the Age
IAT.

H14
NEURAL CORRELATES OF IMPAIRED EMOTIONAL
INTROSPECTION: INCREASED ACC RESPONSE TO
THE
PERCEPTION
OF
FEARFUL
BODILY
EXPRESSIONS IN ALEXITHYMIA Sylvie Berthoz,
Department of Psychiatry for Adolescents and Young Adults,
IMM; Lydia Pouga, UMR 742 INSERM 1 DÇpartement
d'Etudes Cognitives; Beatrice de Gelder, Tilburg University
Julie Gräzes, Department of Psychiatry for Adolescents and
Young Adults, IMM – There is a growing interest in the
neural basis of emotional stimuli processing associated
with alexithymia. Whereas previous studies assessed the
neural corrrelates of emotional pictures or faces
processing in alexithymia, none of them inspected
whether the socioaffective impairments characteristic of
alexithymia are associated with deficiencies in processing
bodily expressed emotions. Here we used functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during the perception
of neutral and fearful bodily expressions to compare the
neural responses of two groups of men with high (n=14)
versus
low
(n=12)
Bermond-Vorst
Alexithymia
Questionnaire scores (selected from the responses of a
pool of 201 men). Moreover, to assess the extent to which
group differences would be related to differences on other
affective dimensions, the participants scores on the
Spielberger's State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, Beck
Depression Inventory and Davis' Interpersonal Reactivity
Index (IRI) were collected. In both groups, the contrast
between fearful and neutral expressions revealed bilateral
activations in the inferior frontal gyrus, the temporoparietal junction, the superior temporal sulcus, the
premotor cortex, the amygdala and the right temporal
pole. Regarding the effect of group, the alexithymic
showed significantly more activation in the right anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) and less activation in the
precuneus than the non-alexithymic participants.
Furthermore, ANCOVA analyses in SPM revealed that
neither anxiety nor depression could account for the
observed between-group differences. However, the IRI
fantasy scale scores were related to the ACC activation.
These results are discussed in line with the literature on
the links between alexithymia, psychosocial functioning
and a lack of empathy.

H16
THE
SHORT
SEROTONIN
TRANSPORTER
POLYMORPHISM AND PRONENESS TO DISTRESS
IN INFANCY Chie Yumoto, Harvard Medical School; JeanFranáois Bureau, University of Ottawa; Zsofia Nemoda,
Semmelweiss Uinversity; Maria Sasvari-Szekely, Semmelweiss
University; Karlen Lyons-Ruth, Harvard Medical School – The
short allele of the serotonin transporter polymorphism
(5HTTLPR) has been related to increased amygdala
response to fearful stimuli (Hairiri & Holmes, 2006) and to
decreased RNA transcriptional efficiency in vitro (Heils,
Mossner, & Lesch, 1997). The short allele has also been
related to increased separation responses in rhesus
monkeys (Barr et al. 2003) and to depression and
suicidality in human adults (Caspi et al, 2003). as well as
temperament and response to novelty among human
infants (Ebstein et al., 1998., Auerbach et al., 1999., Lakatos
et al., 2003). The objective of the current study was to
evaluate whether human infants carrying the short allele
also show increased distress to separation, compared to
those with other genotypes. We hypothesized that the
short allele would predict distress observed during
Strange Situation procedure (SS) (Ainsworth et al.1978) at
age 12 and 18 months, independent of attachment security
or disorganization. Participants were 39 parents and
infants. Buccal epithelial cells were collected by swabs and
genotyped as described by Nemoda et al. (2001). Infant
behaviors during the SS, including avoidance, resistance
to stranger, proximity-seeking, contact-maintaining,
exploration, and crying were factor analyzed yielding a
proneness to distress factor. As predicted, the short allele

H15
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF OWNAGE BIAS IN FACE PROCESSING Harlan M.
Fichtenholtz, Yale University; Natalie C. Ebner, Yale
University; Yi He, Yale University; Gregory McCarthy, Yale
University; Marcia K. Johnson, Yale University – Previous
behavioural research in face recognition and person
identification has shown that adults of different ages are

34

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

was related to infants' proneness to distress, but was not
related to standard assessments of attachment security or
attachment disorganization. Both infant genotype and
infant proneness to distress were unrelated to maternal
interaction with the infant.

experiment, we tested the hypothesis that neural
activation associated with the implicit processing of
trustworthiness is related to the degree to which
participants cooperate with a partner. Fifteen participants
played a single-shot Trust Game while being scanned with
fMRI. Participants played with 64 hypothetical partners
who were previously rated on subjective trustworthiness.
In each game, participants made a decision about how
much to trust their partner, as measured by how much
money they invested with that partner, with no guarantee
of return. As predicted, people invested more money in
partners who were subjectively rated as more trustworthy,
despite no objective relationship between these factors. In
addition, amygdala activation was higher for
untrustworthy faces as compared to trustworthy faces or
the control condition, i.e. slot machines. This amygdala
activation also correlated with the amount of money
entrusted to untrustworthy faces. These data indicate that
the perception of trustworthiness and the associated
neural responses influences social interactive decisionmaking.

H17
VIEWPOINT
SENSITIVITY
OF
VISUAL
REPRESENTATIONS
OF
THE
BODY
IN
EXTRASTRIATE CORTEX: AN FMRI ADAPTATION
STUDY J. Taylor, Bangor University; A. Wiggett, Bangor
University; P. Downing, Bangor University – During social
interactions, the faces and bodies of other people convey
socially-relevant information. Recent fMRI studies have
identified several brain areas involved in visual analysis of
the human body. We focus here on two body-selective
areas in visual cortex: the extrastriate and fusiform body
areas (EBA and FBA). We aimed to assess the viewpoint
invariance of body representations in these areas using an
event-related, pairwise adaptation fMRI design. On each
trial, two images of a given individual (whole body, head
obscured) were briefly presented sequentially, with a
short intervening blank. The pose held in the second
frame could be: 1) different from the first; 2) the same pose
seen from the same angle; or 3) the same pose viewed
from an angle differing from the first by 15_, 30_, 45_, or
60_. Right EBA revealed adaptation to the same-0_
condition (relative to a different pose), with gradually
diminishing adaptation as a function of increasing
viewpoint change. Adaptation was absent beyond 30_. In
right FBA, adaptation as a function of viewpoint change
was flatter, with some evidence of adaptation even for 60_
view changes. These results provide a new functional
dissociation between EBA and FBA. They also (contrary to
a proposal based on findings from TMS) suggest that EBA
and FBA are sensitive to body posture and hence may
contribute to action representations. Together with
previous results, these findings suggest a division
between a relatively part-based, view-specific body
representation in EBA and a relatively holistic, viewindependent representation in FBA.

H19
AUTISTIC TRAITS ARE UNIQUELY ASSOCIATED
WITH SOCIAL ATTRIBUTION AND PSYCHOPATHIC
TRAITS ARE UNIQUELY ASSOCIATED WITH
EMOTION RECOGNITION IN THE CONTEXT OF
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT Mark J. Celano, NIMH; April
S. Timberlake, NIMH; Samantha L. White, NIMH; Nancy R.
Lee, NIMH; Jay N. Giedd, NIMH; Gregory L. Wallace, NIMH
– Diminished social attribution has been shown in
children and adults with autism spectrum disorders.
Deficits in recognition of fearful and sad faces have been
found among children with both high so-called
'psychopathic traits' and conduct problems. These
associations have not been extended to typical
development using a trait-based approach. 104 typically
developing children (age range 7-22 years; 57% male;
mean IQ=113 + 11) screened for neurological, psychiatric,
and learning disorders completed the 'Triangles Playing
Tricks' social attribution task and a morphing faces task
assessing perceptual threshold to accurately identify sad
and fearful faces versus faces depicting the remaining four
of the six basic emotions. Parents of these children also
completed questionnaires assessing autistic (Social
Responsiveness Scale) and psychopathic (Antisocial
Process Screening Device) traits. Though ratings of autistic
and psychopathic traits were highly correlated with one
another, each related uniquely to the social attribution and
emotion recognition tasks, respectively. Specifically,
hierarchical linear regression analyses revealed that
autistic traits were uniquely and significantly predictive of
social attribution performance after the effects of age and
psychopathic traits were controlled, and conversely,
psychopathic traits were uniquely and significantly
predictive of recognition of fearful and sad faces after the
effects of age and autistic traits were controlled. These
findings suggest that not only traits associated with
autism spectrum disorders and psychopathy but also

H18
FRIEND OR FOE: NEURAL RESPONSES TO IMPLICIT
TRUSTWORTHINESS JUDGMENTS INFLUENCES
COOPERATION IN INTERACTIVE DECISIONMAKING Mascha van 't Wout, University of Arizona; Alan
G. Sanfey, University of Arizona – The human face appears
to play a key role in signaling social intentions and people
form reliable and strong impressions on the basis of
someone's facial appearance. Therefore, facial signals
could have a substantial influence on how people behave
towards another person in a social interaction, such as an
interactive risky decision-making game. In particular,
trustworthiness, a rapid, implicit assessment of the
likelihood that a partner will reciprocate a generous
gesture, might be an important social cue. Trustworthiness
judgments are reliably associated with activity in
emotional brain areas, in particular the amygdala. In this

35

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

associated neurocognitive impairments are continuous
and may therefore serve as relevant intermediate
phenotypes for future investigations.

and an average was obtained for each participant for each
cell of the design (e.g. negative-move away). We found an
interaction in which negative scenes became less negative
when moving away and shrinking, and more negative
when coming towards a person and growing. The same
pattern did not appear for neutral scenes. When
participants viewed movies of negative and neutral scenes
that were analogous to what they were instructed to
imagine (e.g. growing and coming towards them), the
same pattern of results emerged, suggesting that
participants were indeed engaging in imagination that
was similar to what they would experience when actually
perceiving a similar situation. These data suggest that
addressing the mental imagery that is associated with a
difficult emotional experience may be beneficial in terms
of regulating that experience.

H20
THE
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
ACTION
IDENTIFICATION Abigail A. Marsh, NIMH; Megan N.
Kozak, Roosevelt University; Maggie E. Reid, NIMH; Henry
Yu, NIMH; Daniel M. Wegner, Harvard University; R.J.R.
Blair, NIMH – Background: Action identification is the
process by which observers identify their own actions and
others' actions at different levels, with lower levels
focusing on the action's physical execution and higher
levels focusing on the action's goals. High-level
identifications indicate representation of the actor's mental
processes. Although action identification overlaps
conceptually with Theory of Mind, the neural correlates of
action identification have not yet been identified.
Methods: Fifteen healthy adult participants completed
fMRI testing in a 3-run event-related task. Prior to each
run, participants read a description of an actor that
depicted him as likeable, neutral, or unlikable. During the
scanned run, participants selected either high-level or lowlevel identifications for the actor's actions. Results:
Replicating prior findings, the actions of liked actors were
identified at higher levels than those of either neutral or
disliked actors. The proportion of high-level relative to
low-level identifications participants made was correlated
with Autism Quotient scores. In addition, a 3 (actor) x 2
(action identification) ANOVA on fMRI data revealed that
the amygdala and middle temporal gyrus are involved in
high-level identifications of the actions of liked actors,
whereas the insula/middle frontal gyrus is predominantly
involved in high-level identifications of disliked actors.
Conclusions: These are the first data to determine the
neural correlates of action identification. They suggest a
role for amygdala, insula, and temporal cortex in the
mental representation of the actions of others and support
the notion that action identification is related to Theory of
Mind.

H22
FAMILIARITY BREEDS HELPING: PHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES OF EMPATHY AND ALTRUISM Alicia J.
Hofelich, University of Michigan; Stephanie D. Preston,
University of Michigan – The neuroscientific underpinnings
of empathy have been intensively studied, but few of
these studies have investigated the moderators of
empathy. According to a Perception-Action Mechanism
(PAM; Preston and de Waal, 2002), state-matching should
be much greater when the observer has existing
representations of the person or state through common
past experience. To test this hypothesis, subjects with and
without empathy-related careers (e.g. nurses versus
administrative staff) watched videos of real hospital
patients discussing their personal experiences with
chronic and terminal illness. During the videos we
collected heart rate (HR), skin conductance (SCR), facial
electromyography, and respiration. After each video,
participants reported feelings of empathic concern,
personal distress, similarity, familiarity, and the amount of
help they would offer the patient. Supporting the PAM
and Batson's Empathy-Altruism Hypothesis, principal
components analysis demonstrated that offers of help
increased with overall levels of attention, emotion and
empathic concern. Interestingly, the two principal factors
in this study were not personal distress and empathic
concern, but personal distress (associated with SCR and
corrugator
activation)
and
familiarity/similarity
(associated with increased HR and zygomatic activation).
Empathic concern was located midway between the two
constructs, suggesting that empathy and helping require
both a positive sense of sharing and familiarity as well as a
sense of distress related to the other's need. The career of
the subject interacted with the amount of help offered to
specific patients, but not the amount of empathy or
distress felt, indicating that experience may play a role in
defining altruistic, but not empathetic, responses.

H21
MENTAL IMAGERY IN THE REGULATION OF
EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE Joshua Ian Davis, Columbia
University; James J Gross, Stanford University; Kevin N
Ochsner, Columbia University – Mental imagery is
commonly associated with emotional experience. For
example, when a person has gone through trauma they
may repeatedly review the traumatic incident in their
mind's eye, often distorting it as they do, making the more
negative aspects most salient. We investigated whether
manipulation of the mental imagery associated with a
negative experience can change the emotional quality of
the experience. All participants were shown pictures of
both negative and neutral scenes, one at a time, and then
were asked to imagine the scenes they saw either coming
towards them and growing, remaining the same, or
moving away from them and shrinking. All participants
took part in all conditions, in a repeated measures design,

H23
QUANTITATIVE VOXEL BASED-MORPHOMETRY
OF 5HT TRANSPORTER GENE; VARIATION IN
HIPPOCAMPAL AND AMYGDALA STRUCTURE M.

36

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

Korczykowski, University of Pennsylvania; J.J. Wang,
University of Pennsylvania; P. Yushkevich, University of
Pennsylvania; J. Pluta, University of Pennsylvania; D.L.
Minkoff, University of Pennsylvania; H. Rao, University of
Pennsylvania;
C.
Webber-Deonauth,
University
of
Pennsylvania; H. Dow, University of Pennsylvania; E. Brodkin,
University of Pennsylvania, J. Detre, University of
Pennsylvania – Gentic variation in the 5HT transporter
allele, which has been linked to affective illness, may be
associated with selective alterations in hippocampal and
amygdala function. However, less is known about the
extent to which genetic variation in the 5HT transporter
allele may be associated with selective alterations in
hippocampal and amygdala structure. This qVBM
'genomic neuroimaging' study will provide a a structural
and volumetric bridge between genetic and functional
activation paradigms, and will inform models of limbic
system 'protective versus predispositional' interactions for
stress and mood disorders. This study will extend
previous findings of genetic variation in default brain
function (Rao et al, 2007) and build a conceptual and
methodological bridge to current models of psychological
stress (Wang et al, 2005 & 2007) and affective illness.

agency without actual control can make a bad experience
worse.
H25
MINDREADING IN JAPAN AND THE U.S.: AN FMRI
INVESTIGATION. R.B. Adams Jr., Penn State; E. Wang,
Tufts University; N. Rule, Tufts University; A. Schmid, Tufts
University; R.G. Franklin Jr., Penn State; M.T. Stevenson,
Penn State; S. Yoshikawa, Kyoto University; M. Nomura,
Kyoto University; W. Sato, Kyoto University; N. Ambady,
Tufts University – Throughout history and across cultures,
the eyes hold special prominence in human social
interaction. Indeed, popular folk wisdom speculates that
"the eyes are the window to our souls," a presumption that
remains nearly axiomatic in contemporary social
interaction. This begs two questions: Is there a language of
the eyes? And, if so, to what extent is this language readily
translatable across cultures? The ability to perceive others'
thoughts, intentions, and feelings, (i.e., mind read) is
regarded as a highly evolved human attribute (Brune &
Brune-Cohrs, 2006; Allison, Puce, & McCarthy, 2000).
Cross-cultural comparisons of mind reading, however,
remain limited. To date preliminary evidence supports the
presence of some biologically determined components of
this ability (Avis & Harris, 1991; but see also Kobayashi,
Glover, & Temple, 2006; 2007). Whether the ability to read
minds varies as a function of whose mind is read,
however, remains a virtually uncharted question on both
the behavioral and neural levels and is the focus of the
current examination. Herein we provide evidence for an
intracultural advantage in the mind reading ability for
both native Japanese and U.S. White participants. Using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we
examined the neural processes associated with this
advantage, revealing greater bilateral superior temporal
sulci (STS) recruitment for ingroup versus outgroup mind
reading for both cultural groups. These findings support
cultural consistency in the neurological architecture
subserving high-level mind reading, as well its differential
recruitment based on the cultural identity of the decoder
in relation to who is being read.

H24
THE ROLE OF AGENCY IN MODULATING
CONDITIONED AROUSAL Catherine A. Hartley, New
York University; Erica P. Meltzer, New York University; Rabia
Salman, New York University; Janelle K. Szary, New York
University; Elizabeth A. Phelps, New York University –
Previous research has demonstrated that instrumental
control over an aversive stimulus can mitigate the arousal
it evokes. In this study, we examined whether an
increased sense of agency, in the absence of instrumental
control, could alter conditioned arousal responses to
anticipated aversive outcomes. Subjects participated in
two fear-conditioning sessions that constituted the agency
and no-agency conditions. In each session, two grey
squares were presented on the screen concealing two
distinct colored geometric shapes. One shape, the CS+,
was paired with a shock on a subset of trials. The other,
the CS-, was never paired with a shock. In the agency
session trials, subjects were asked to choose one grey
square and reveal the shape underneath. In the no-agency
session, a square was chosen for them. Subjects were
instructed that each shape had equal probability of being
randomly placed under each square, making a learned
instrumental avoidance response impossible. Actual
placement of the stimuli was manipulated to enable yoked
stimulus presentation across conditions. Subjects exhibited
larger conditioned responses in the agency session than
the no agency session. When subjects played a role in
determining the outcome without any actual control over
it, they showed more arousal than when they passively
observed the same outcome without making any choice.
This suggests that merely engaging in a decision making
process confers a sense of responsibility for undesired
outcomes that may result from that choice. Thus, unlike
the mitigating effects of instrumental control, increased

H26
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERSONAL AND
EMPATHIC SOCIAL REJECTION IN ADOLESCENCE
Carrie L. Masten, UCLA; Naomi I. Eisenberger, UCLA; Mirella
Dapretto, UCLA – Developmental research has
demonstrated that both personal and observed rejection
experiences impact adolescent adjustment, yet research
has focused primarily on personal experiences with
rejection using behavioral methods. Our lab has
previously identified neural networks, including the
dACC and Insula, associated with experiences of social
exclusion among adults (Eisenberger, Lieberman, and
Williams, 2003), and in the current study we extend this
work to an adolescent population in which sensitivity to
peer rejection is particularly salient and examine both
personal and empathic experiences with social rejection.
During an fMRI scan, 26 adolescents (ages 12-13) were

37

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

excluded during a ball-tossing game in which they
believed they were playing with two other adolescents,
who were actually computer-controlled. During an
additional run they observed another "participant"
excluded from the same game. Participants completed
behavioral measures of subjective rejection following each
run, and empathic concern. Findings from the first 12
adolescents suggest that adolescents experience social
exclusion at the neural level similarly to adults, including
activation in the dACC and Insula, but also show
activation in the amygdala during social distress,
suggesting adolescents may experience rejection in unique
ways. During empathic exclusion, adolescents who
reported their own experience with exclusion to be more
distressing also displayed more distress at the neural level
when observing another victim of exclusion, as well as
activity in the dmPFC, consistent with research examining
mentalizing processes. Overall findings suggest that
during adolescence both direct and empathic experiences
with social rejection contribute to distress experiences at
both subjective and neural levels.

H28
NEURAL ACTIVATION DURING COMPASSION,
AWE, PRIDE AND REWARD: AN FMRI STUDY OF
PRO-SOCIAL AND SELF-FOCUSED EMOTIONS
Emiliana Simon-Thomas, University of California Berkeley; Jake
Godzik, University of California Berkeley; Dacher Keltner,
University of California Berkeley – Neuroimaging studies of
emotion generally focus on valence and arousal
dimensions or the 'basic' emotions: anger, fear, disgust,
sad, surprise, and happy (Phan, Wager et al. 2004). Less is
known about positive states like pride (Tracy and Robins
2004), or emotions that motivate pro-social behavior like
love, awe and compassion (Haidt 2003; Shiota, Campos et
al. 2003; Gonzaga, Turner et al. 2006). Here, we investigate
BOLD activity during 2 pro-social and 2 self-focused
emotions: compassion, awe, pride and reward,
respectively. FMRI was acquired while 14 healthy subjects
viewed sequences of emotionally evocative pictures.
Whole-brain analysis showed that each emotion was
associated with distinct regional activation. Compassion
activated the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (mPFCd),
which supports perspective taking, (D'Argembeau, Ruby
et al. 2007) and mental state attribution (Ochsner, Beer et
al. 2005; Mitchell, Macrae et al. 2006) as well as the
amygdala, which signals emotional and social salience
(LeDoux 2007). Left orbital frontal cortex (OFC) activation
was observed during awe; this area has been implicated in
stimulus-reward association (Hornak, O'Doherty et al.
2004), attachment-related love (Nitschke, Nelson et al.
2004), general approach orientation and positive
emotionality (Davidson 2004). Pride elicited activation in
the ventral medial prefrontal cortex (mPFCv), an area
involved in self-referential thinking (Ochsner, Beer et al.
2005). Finally, consistent with existing research on reward,
reward pictures engaged the nucleus accumbens (Knutson
and Cooper 2005). Altogether, this data suggests that these
pro-social and self-focused emotional states have distinct
biological correlates that reflect their unique underlying
themes and psychological processes.

H27
NEED FOR CLOSURE MODERATES NEURAL
ACTIVITY DURING COGNITIVE DISSONANCE
Johanna M Jarcho, UCLA; Elliot A Berkman, UCLA; Matthew
D Lieberman, UCLA – Hundreds of cognitive dissonance
studies have established that difficult decisions between
two equally-liked options lead to increased liking of the
chosen option. Although the phenomenon of post-choice
increase in liking is well-established, relatively little is
known about the mental processes that occur in the
moments that lead up to this change in attitude. One
factor that may affect these mental processes is an
aversion towards ambiguity known as need for closure
(NFC). We conducted an fMRI study in which participants
who completed a NFC assessment first rated how much
they liked a series of individual stimuli, then while being
scanned, chose which stimulus they preferred among
pairs of similarly-liked stimuli, and finally re-rated each
stimulus. While making attitude-altering decisions,
individuals higher (compared to lower) in NFC showed
greater activity in regions associated with inhibition and
self-related processes such as, ventrolateral and
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, and decreased activity in
areas associated with conflict and negative affect such as
dorsal anterior cingulate gyrus and amygdale. Functional
connectivity analyses revealed that the activity in
ventrolateral and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex was
negatively related to activity in dorsal anterior cingulate
gyrus and amygdala, suggesting an inhibitory relationship
among these systems. These results are consistent with a
model of post-choice attitude change in which discomfortinducing ambiguity is mitigated by effortful cognitive
processes, which are employed to a greater degree when
individuals are high in NFC.

H29
THE INFLUENCE OF IMPLICIT ASSOCIATIONS ON
THE PERCEPTION OF FACES FROM DIFFERENT
RACES: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Yi
He, Yale University; Marcia K. Johnson, Yale University;
Gregory McCarthy, Yale University – The neural correlates
of the perception of faces from different races were
investigated.
Twenty-one
Caucasian
participants
performed a gender identification task in which Asian,
Black, and White faces were presented in random order
while event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded from
32 scalp electrodes. At the conclusion of the gender task,
subjects were administered the implicit association test for
Black (IAT-Black) and Asian (IAT-Asian). Black faces
evoked a larger positive ERP over frontal scalp that
peaked at 168ms after face onset than White faces, while
White faces evoked a larger negative ERP that peaked at
244ms. These Black/White ERP differences significantly
correlated with subject's scores on the IAT-Black. ERPs

38

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

also differentiated White from Asian faces and a
significant correlation was obtained between the WhiteAsian ERP difference waves at ~500ms and the IAT-Asian.
A positive ERP at 116ms differentiated all three races, but
was not correlated with either IAT. In addition, a late
positive component (around 592ms) was observed to be
greater to the same-race than both other-races, which may
suggest a deeper processing of the same-race faces.
Together, the correlations observed for both other-races
showed the influence of a racial evaluative process that
may include early automatic and later controlled
processes.

Numerics, Inc.; Jordan Grafman, National Institutes of Health –
This study examined the effects of ventromedial
prefrontal (vmPFC), lateral orbitofrontal (lOFC), and
anterior temporal (aTL) cortical lesions on stereotypical
social attitudes in 154 patients with penetrating head
injuries. In a previous study, patients with vmPFC lesions
showed impaired representation of stereotypical social
knowledge (Milne and Grafman, 2001). However, the
number of patients studied was small, and lesions
extended into the lOFC as well. Using a recentlydeveloped lesion mapping technique and a large sample
size, we were able to disentangle the role of these two
brain regions and further probe the contribution of the
aTL, recently shown to represent abstract social
conceptual knowledge, in mediating gender stereotypes
(as assessed by the Implicit Association Test). Linear
regression models revealed the contribution of each brain
region, while controlling for potential confounders. Our
results showed dissociable effects of prefrontal and
anterior temporal cortical lesions: lesions in the vmPFC
and aTL were associated with stronger stereotypical
attitudes, whereas damage to the lOFC was associated
with weaker stereotypical attitudes. Based on these
findings, we speculate that detailed knowledge of typical
sequences of social actions (stored in the vmPFC) and of
abstract conceptual social knowledge (represented in the
aTL) is needed for differentiated social evaluation and
may therefore be protective against the exaggeration of
stereotypical social attitudes. The opposing effects of
lesions in lOFC and vmPFC or aTL on stereotypical social
attitudes point to dissociable neural systems for
promotion and prevention of stereotypes, both of which
may be critical to guide our everyday interpersonal
evaluations.

H30
THE ROLE OF EMOTIONAL NEURAL CIRCUITS IN
ENHANCING MEMORY FOR SELF-RELEVANT
INFORMATION Lian T. Rameson, UCLA; Ajay B. Satpute,
UCLA; Matthew D. Lieberman, UCLA – Self-schemas are
domain-specific generalizations about the self that are
forged through experience and help guide future behavior
(Markus, 1977). Interestingly, individuals who possess a
self-schema in a particular domain tend to show enhanced
recall for information within that domain. A previous
investigation into the neural basis of self-schemas showed
that making self-relevant decisions in one's schematic
domain recruits brain regions that are involved in
affective, motivational, and automatic responses,
including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, nucleus
accumbens, and amygdala (Lieberman, Jarcho & Satpute,
2004). This finding is suggestive because these brain
regions have been found to be involved in processing
emotional material and in enhancing recall for emotional
material, which tends to be better-remembered than
neutral material (LaBar & Cabeza, 2006). Therefore, we
hypothesized that the activation of this affective circuit
during self-schematic processing may be responsible for
the demonstrated relationship between self-schemas and
enhanced recall. In this fMRI study, participants made
self-relevant judgments in schematic and nonschematic
domains to create both behavioral and neural indices of
schematicity. To assess memory, participants viewed
neutral images related to schematic and non-schematic
domains and then underwent a surprise memory test. The
results replicated previous work and provided evidence
that affective brain regions underlie the relationship
between self-schemas and enhanced recall. This suggests
that being self-schematic in a domain may cause an
individual to process information that is otherwise neutral
in an emotionally valenced manner, which results in the
material becoming more memorable for that individual.

H32
HOT CARS AND FAST WOMEN: THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF PREFERENCE JUDGMENTS Malia F.
Mason, Columbia Business School Michael I. Norton, Harvard
Business School C. Neil Macrae, University of Aberdeen –
Among the multitude of decisions in which humans
engage, the evaluation of the things that populate their
surroundings is arguably the most fundamental: Do I like
this or not? The sum of negative and positive aspects of
these evaluations - traditionally referred to as the decisionmaker's "utility" (by economists) or "attitude" (by
psychologists) - determine how people interact with their
environment. Despite evidence that people constantly
evaluate the items in their surroundings, little is known
about the nature of these judgments; in particular,
whether all evaluations are identical or if the mechanisms
employed to evaluate the item depend on the nature of the
target and the potential implications it has for the
perceiver. In the present article we seek to determine
whether basic evaluative judgments are independent of
the identity of the target or whether the mechanisms
depend on the nature of the representation in question.
Using fMRI we compare male participants' evaluations of
biologically-relevant (females), culturally-relevant (cars),

H31
DISSOCIABLE EFFECTS OF PREFRONTAL AND
ANTERIOR TEMPORAL CORTICAL LESIONS ON
STEREOTYPICAL SOCIAL ATTITUDES Marta Gozzi,
National Institutes of Health, UniversitÖ di Milano Bicocca;
Roland Zahn, National Institutes of Health, University of
Manchester; Vanessa Raymont, National Institutes of Health,
National Naval Medical Center; Jeffrey Solomon, Medical

39

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

and novel (abstract shapes) stimuli. Results indicate that
whereas assessments of culturally-relevant and novel
stimuli depend almost exclusively on visual processing
areas (e.g., fusiform), judgments of biologically-relevant
stimuli involve regions of the brain implicated in both
reward processing (e.g., nucleus accumbens) and the rapid
detection of targets with potential survival value (e.g.,
amygdala). These findings suggest that the accuracy with
which behavioral scientists can calculate the valence and
strength of a given attitude may be enhanced by an
awareness of the neural components of that judgment.

Shehzad, New York University Child Study Center; Dylan G.
Gee, New York University Child Study Center; Ben Gallagher,
New York University Child Study Center; Jonathan S.
Adelstein, New York University Child Study Center; A. M.
Clare Kelly, New York University Child Study Center; Daniel
S. Margulies, New York University Child Study Center; Phil
Reiss New York University Child Study Center; F. Xavier
Castellanos, New York University Child Study Center; Michael
P. Milham, New York University Child Study Center– Goal:
Empathy is a multidimensional construct central to
normal social interaction, and is defined as an emotional
reaction to the experiences of others. The Interpersonal
Reactivity Index (IRI) divides empathy into four subfacets: perspective taking, fantasy, empathic concern, and
personal distress (Davis, 1980). We present a novel
approach for correlating empathic ability with
connectivity of specific brain regions, employing restingstate functional connectivity (RS-FC) methods. Methods:
Images were acquired from 42 subjects on a Siemens 3T
scanner (TR = 2000ms; TE = 25ms; Flip angle = 90) during
rest. For each, 197 EPI volumes and a T1-weighted
anatomical image were acquired. Subjects completed the
IRI questionnaire. We chose medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) as a region-of-interest (ROI) based on previous
literature, and extracted the average hemodynamic
timeseries from each subject using masks defined by the
Harvard-Oxford Cortical Structural Atlas. The timeseries
were included in FSL's GLM along with nuisance
covariates to produce maps of voxels in the brain
positively correlated with mPFC. At the group level,
individual scores on each of the IRI sub-facets were
included, producing maps of regions that covaried in
connectivity with the mPFC as a function of empathy
score. Results: Subjects scoring higher on the fantasy
subscale showed a greater positive correlation between
mFPC and precuneus. Those scoring higher on the
empathic subscale showed a greater positive correlation
between mPFC and right insula. Conclusions: As
demonstrated by these results regarding empathy, RS-FC
is a useful new method for exploring relationships
between brain connectivity and social cognition.

H33
DIFFERENTIAL RESPONSIVENESS TO SOCIAL AND
MONETARY INCENTIVES AS REFLECTED IN BRAIN
AND BEHAVIOR Gregor Kohls, University Hospital Aachen;
Katja, University Hospital Aachen; Lena Rademacher,
University Hospital Aachen; Sîren Krach, University Hospital
Aachen; Tilo Kircher University Hospital Aachen; Gerhard
GrÅnder, University Hospital Aachen; Beate HerpertzDahlmann, University Hospital Aachen; Kerstin Konrad,
University Hospital Aachen – Goal-directed human behavior
is guided by both monetary and social incentives.
Although fMRI research suggests that anticipating
monetary reward activates the ventral striatum, data
about the role of mesolimbic structures in social reward
anticipation is still scarce. In two studies, we investigated
to what extent social compared to non-social incentives
differentially impact on response behaviour and brain
responses in adults. Knutson's Monetary Incentive Delay
Task, and a modified version of the task which social
incentives (i.e., facial expressions) instead of money were
applied in a behavioral (N=38, 19 females) as well as in an
fMRI study (N=32, 16 females). In addition, the impact of
personality traits (such as reward seeking and empathy)
on reward responsiveness was assessed. Both social and
monetary
incentives
improved
behavioral
task
performance, although larger effects were detected for
financial reward. Benefits from social incentives were
strongly correlated with personality traits such as reward
responsiveness and empathy, but only in males. By
contrast, profit from monetary incentives was associated
with harm avoidance tendencies in females. On the brain
level we found, that the anticipation of financial reward
activated the mesolimbic circuit (e.g., ventral striatum). By
contrast, anticipated social reward induced less striatal
activations, but additionally activated the ventral ACC, a
region formerly shown as critical for valuing social
feedback. Altogether, the data suggest that social
incentives have a weaker reinforcing value than money,
mirrored in reduced mesolimbic activations. However,
different personality traits (and possibly gender) seem to
determine to what extent an adult profit from different
rewards.

H35
DECIPHERING BRAIN SIGNALS RELATED TO
PEOPLE WITH EMOTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE A
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL
STUDY.
Einat
Ofek,
University of Zurich, Technion Evoked Potentials Laboratory,
Israel
–
The
current
study
addresses
the
neurophysiological basis of human interactions, past and
present. Previous studies have been performed on brain
response to familiar people (faces and first names).
However, none of them evaluated the emotional
significance of these people. This new study evaluates
emotional significance in context of a broad spectrum of
brain activity including brain response to familiar people
significant to the subject. Brain activity and behavioral
measures were taken while sixteen subjects heard first
names. EEG was recorded and Event Related Potentials
(ERPs) computed for each participant. A validated

H34
A RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
APPROACH TO UNDERSTANDING EMPATHY Lucina
Q. Uddin, New York University Child Study Center; Zarrar

40

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

questionnaire was performed after the experiment to
evaluate the significance of the stimuli to each subject.
Relevant relationship context data was also collected. The
results of this new study indicate a specific, repeatable,
and robust brain response to emotionally significant
stimuli. ERP data yielded measurable information on
topics including: past traumatic experience, hatred,
longing, past and present romantic relationships,
childhood experiences, and other topics. Additional
studies will be performed with refined techniques to
strengthen the significance of these findings and enhance
the scope of the ERPs being measured. In addition to a
broad spectrum of applications that could enhance
medical care, the understanding and follow-up of these
unique brain responses may improve psychotherapy and
psychoanalysis in general. Initial finding suggest early
applications of the techniques derived from this study
may also improve treatment and diagnosis in clinical
conditions such as Coma, Alzheimer and Autism. The
data reported here prove precise neural correlations of
emotional experience can be effectively measured.
Acknowledgement: The data analyzed for this report were
acquired in the Technion Evoked Potentials Laboratory.

H37
PERCEIVING FEAR AND ANGER FROM DYNAMIC
FACES AND BODIES AN FMRI STUDY M.E. Kret,
University of Tilburg; J. Grezes, UMR 742 INSERM 1
DÇpartement d'Etudes Cognitives, INSERM-Ecole Normale
SupÇrieure; S. Pichon, UMR 742 INSERM 1 DÇpartement
d'Etudes Cognitives, INSERM-Ecole Normale SupÇrieure; B.
de Gelder, University of Tilburg; Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School – We express and communicate our
emotional states and the associated action tendencies with
our bodies of which facial expressions are an integral part.
It is presently unclear to what extent our perception of
whole body expressions use a neurofunctional network
that partly overlaps with the network dedicated to
processing facial expressions. To clarify these issues, and
to compare activations attributable to emotional body
stimuli with activations triggered by isolated facial
expressions, we conducted two event-related functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments. Our goal
was to compare face and body triggered activity and relate
it to the specific emotion represented, fear or anger. In the
first experiment, short video fragments of facial and
bodily expressions (anger vs. neutral) were used. The
second experiment compared neutral expressions with
face and body expressions of fear. Each experiment
contained 352 trials of which 80 scrambled videos and 16
oddballs. Our results indicate that viewing facial as well
as whole body expressions of anger and fear activate the
extrastriate body area and the superior temporal sulcus.
Viewing body expressions compared to facial expressions
is associated with the fusiform gyrus, the temporo-parietal
junction and the intraparietal sulcus. Moreover, fearful
expressions modulate activity within the fusiform gyrus.
Finally, the premotor cortex was found to be specifically
involved in processing angry body expressions, as
revealed by the interaction. Taken together, our results
plead in favour of taking into account the specific emotion
expressed when comparing the neurofunctional basis of
emotions shown by the face and the whole body.

H36
ARE YOU LYING TO ME? USING TEMPORAL CUES
FOR DECEPTION DETECTION Marilyn Boltz, Haverford
College; Rebecca Dyer, Haverford College; Anna Miller,
Haverford College – One skill that sets humans apart from
other primates is their ability to manipulate the mental
states of others, in part through deception. The purpose of
the present research was to extend the previous literature
by investigating which cues perceivers use to assess
deceit. Given the relative unreliability of visual cues, the
present study focuses on temporal cues, exploring
whether variations in speech rate and response latency
provide cues for deception. Participants listened to a
conversation between a male/female couple containing
responses to questions that varied in timing characteristics
and potential type of lie (self-oriented versus otheroriented). A logistic regression analysis revealed
significant differences in participants' perceptions of
deceit that depended on speech timing characteristics, as
well as the gender of the speaker. Relative to early and ontime latencies, which yield a higher proportion of
perceived truths, late latencies are consistently perceived
as less honest. The perceived frequency of truths vs. lies is
generally comparable across speech rates. The one
exception involves the male speaker responding to selforiented questions. Relative to conditions where both
speakers use the same speech rate, the perceived
frequency of lies increases when early latencies occur at a
faster speech rate. In addition, whereas the female speaker
was perceived as most often lying for someone else's
benefit, the male speaker was perceived as lying for his
own benefit. Results suggest the potential relevance of
various other contextual factors, including the nature of
the speakers' relationship, the topic of discussion, and the
surrounding social context.

H38
PSYCHOPATHIC
TENDENCIES:
REDUCED
EMOTIONAL RESPONSIVENESS OR ANOMALOUS
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL? Julia C. Schechter, NIMH;
Abigail A. Marsh, NIMH; Katie A. Fowler, NIMH; Stephen
Sinclair, Daniel S. Pine, NIMH; R.J.R. Blair NIMH –
Background: There have been suggestions that the
reduced emotional responsiveness seen in psychopathy
reflects the primary pathology (Blair et al., 2005) or that it
is secondary to atypical attentional control such that
emotional stimuli are not processed when task demands
direct attention to task relevant stimuli (Newman et al.,
2002). The current study examined BOLD responses using
fMRI of children with psychopathic tendencies and
comparison children when performing a task examining
the impact of attentional load on the amygdala's response
to emotional cues. Methods: This was an event related

41

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

fMRI paradigm involving children with psychopathic
tendencies and comparison children. Participants viewed
neutral and fearful faces that were spatially flanked by
bars varying in orientation (cf. Pessoa et al., 2005). Across
trials, the bars were either parallel to one another or
differing in orientation by 12 (high attentional load), 24, or
90 (low attentional load) degrees. Participants responded
as to whether the bars were parallel or not. Results:
Children
with
psychopathic
tendencies
showed
appropriate recruitment of regions implicated in
attentional control with increasing attentional load. In
contrast, at levels of low task relevant attentional load,
children with psychopathic tendencies showed reduced
amygdala responses to fearful distracters. Conclusions:
These data are consistent with suggestions that
psychopathy reflects a primary pathology in emotional
responsiveness.

H40
THE DIFFERENTIAL EFFECT OF POSITIVE SOCIAL
EMOTIONS ON MORAL DECISIONS
Nina
Strohminger, University of Michigan; Rick Lewis, University of
Michigan; Dave Meyer, University of Michigan – It has
become commonplace to assume that the positive social
emotions—such as pride, gratitude, elevation, and mirth—
are relatively indistinct in their cognitive-behavioral
effects, and that their
impact is always positive.
However, recent evidence from the moral decisionmaking literature calls this view into question. Valdesolo
& DeSteno (2006) found that mirth (humor) causes
subjects to make more utilitarian but less empathetic
choices in trolleycar-type moral dilemmas. In order to
determine whether this effect was the result of the general
influence of positive emotions or whether it was due to
the specific attributes of humor, we replicated this study
with an additional positive social emotion, elevation
(associated with moral beauty).
We also measured
performance on personality scales relating to moral
behavior and used eye-tracking to see whether eye gaze
and pupil dilation were predictive of these decisions. We
predicted that elevation would stir deontic moral
principles and lower moral permissiveness, and that
mirth’s higher permissiveness ratings would reflect
reduced empathy rather than clear-headed utilitarianism.
We also predicted that mirth would make participants
more willing to make personal violations when the victim
was an authority figure, in keeping with theories claiming
that humor plays a role in hierarchy regulation (e.g.
Fessler & Haley, 2003). Our results suggest that the
decisional effects of mirth and elevation are distinctive
and reflect their respective social functions. This study
sheds light on several bigger-picture questions, such as the
ramifications of using positive emotions to induce
“positive affect,” the evolutionary function of two poorly
understood social emotions, the link between emotion and
moral deliberation, and the usefulness of eyetracking in
social cognition research.

H39
NEURAL BASES OF SELF AND CLOSE OTHER
PROCESSING IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN R.D. Ray ,
Vanderbilt University; A. Shelton, Johns Hopkins; N.G. Hollon,
NIH; B. Mischel, Harvard University; J.J Gross , Stanford
University; J.D.E. Gabrieli, MIT – Recent research has
demonstrated that midline structures such as the MPFC
and PCC are recruited to process information about one's
self. However, this research has been mixed as to whether
processing information about close others relies upon the
same regions. Furthermore, only one study has examined
the neural bases of self-referential processing in children.
To address these gaps in the literature, the present studies
use behavioral and fMRI methods to look at the
relationship of self and close other referential processing
in both adults and children. Study 1 demonstrates that
when adults engage in self- and close other-referential
processing there is substantial overlap in regions of
MPFC, anterior cingulate (ACC) and posterior cingulate;
however, a region of rostral ACC/MPFC shows
significantly greater activation when processing
information about one's self. Study 2 shows that younger
children recall more close other, mother words, whereas
older children recall more self encoded words. Study 3
demonstrates that neurally, this difference in young
versus older children is associated with activations in
regions of the rostral ACC such that children who
remember more mother words activate more rostral
anterior cingulate when processing mother words. Older
children activate this same region more when processing
words encoded with the self. These studies suggest that
accessing representations of self and crucial close others
such as one's mother in involves many common brain
regions, however, the representation that is most able to
capture attention and memory resources is the
representation that is most emotionally salient at each
developmental period.

H41
SEX-RELATED DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN
NEURAL RESPONSE TO ANTICIPATED PEER
EVALUATION Amanda E. Guyer, NIMH; Erin B. McClureTone, Georgia State University; Daniel S. Pine, NIMH; Eric E.
Nelson, NIMH – Behaviorally-based studies have
demonstrated that peer interaction undergoes changes in
adolescence that can differ by sex and age. The present
study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
to assess brain responses to peers in this age group. Given
the increased self-focus and concern about social
evaluation on patterns of affect in adolescence, the current
study focused on self-appraisal in an evaluative context
and assessed age- and sex-related changes in 36
psychiatrically healthy 9 to 17 year olds. The "Chatroom
Task," consisted of two phases. In phase one, participants
were led to believe they were participating in a study of
internet-based communication and would chat online
with another teenager from a collaborating institution.

42

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

Subjects viewed photographs of alleged "participants" and
rated their interest in interacting with them. Subjects were
then photographed and told they would be similarly
evaluated by the other "participants." In phase two,
subjects underwent neuroimaging while reviewing the
photographs they had rated previously and were asked to
evaluate how interested they thought each depicted peer
would be in interacting with them. We compared brain
activity while participants performed this assessment on
peers in whom the subject previously expressed high vs.
low interest. Differential age- and sex-related activation
patterns
emerged
in
the
nucleus
accumbens,
hippocampus, hypothalamus, and insula. Activation was
most robust in older relative to younger females, but
showed no association with age in males. Relating these
neural response patterns to changes in adolescent socialcognition enriches theories of adolescent social
development
through
enhanced
neurobiological
understanding of social behavior.

H43
DIFFERENTIAL ACTIVATION TO CLEAR VERSUS
AMBIGUOUS FACIAL EXPRESSIONS OF THREAT:
AN ERP INVESTIGATION Michael T. Stevenson, The
Pennsylvania State University; Reginald B. Adams Jr., The
Pennsylvania State University; Robert G. Franklin, The
Pennsylvania State University; Nalini Ambady, Tufts
University – Previously, direct and averted gaze have been
shown to differentially enhance perceived intensity,
recognition accuracy, and processing efficiency of anger
and fear expressions, respectively (Adams and Kleck,
2003, 2005). We examined responses to these clear and
ambiguous threat/gaze pairings in facial expressions of
emotion using ERP. Of particular interest were two early
components in the visual stream known to be involved in
both face processing (Bentin et al., 1996; Rossion et al,
2000) and emotion perception (Jeffreys, 1996; Batty and
Taylor, 2003): the Vertex Positive Potential (VPP) and the
N200 response. Recent evidence demonstrates that the
VPP component reflects early, bottom-up processing,
unsusceptible to top-down influences (Rossion et al, 1999;
Campanella, et al., 2002), whereas the slightly later N200
response appears susceptible to conscious, top-down
influences (Rossion et al, 1999; Jemel, et al., 2003). Based
on these findings, we examined whether VPP and N200
potentials would differ in response to ambiguous versus
clear threat. Participants viewed pictures of faces
expressing anger or fear with either direct or averted (left
or right) eyegaze while EEG was recorded. They were
asked to indicate the gender of each stimulus. The VPP
response, which is generally thought to reflect purely
bottom-up processing, was preferentially responsive to
clear threat cues, whereas the slightly later N200 response,
known to be influenced by top-down modulation, was
preferentially responsive to ambiguous threat cues.
Particularly striking is how closely aligned these
responses are in time, thereby offering further evidence
that these processing streams are dissociable and operate
in parallel.

H42
PHYSIOLOGICAL SUBSTRATES OF EMPATHIC
ACCURACY Jamil Zaki, Columbia University; Niall Bolger,
Columbia University; Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University –
Perceivers whose autonomic activity covaries with that of
social targets (physiological linkage) are more accurate
about negative affect reported by these targets (empathic
accuracy, or EA). This finding has been used to argue that
social cognition relies on perceivers' experience of internal
states similar to those of targets. However, the utility of
sharing internal states with targets may not hold in all
situations. For example, the role physiological linkage in
facilitating EA assumes that targets' arousal matches their
affective experience (affective coherence), which is not
consistently the case. The current work investigated how
target coherence affects EA, and its relationship to
physiological linkage. Targets were videotaped while
talking about emotional autobiographical events, and their
skin conductance response (SCR) were measured
concurrently. Targets watched the videos they had made
and continuously rated how positive or negative they had
felt while talking. Perceivers watched these videos and
made continuous ratings of how positive or negative they
thought targets were feeling; their SCR was concurrently
recorded. Timecourse correlations were used to calculate
EA, physiological linkage, and targets' emotional
coherence. We replicated the finding that physiological
linkage predicts EA only for negative affect, and further
found that a target's affective coherence predicts EA across
valences. For negative emotions, target coherence also
predicted physiological linkage, and its effect on EA was
partially mediated through physiological linkage. These
findings suggest that sharing arousal levels of targets is
related to understanding their emotions, and that coherent
targets cause more arousal sharing than less coherent
targets.

H44
MIRRORING AND SOCIAL COGNITION: EEG AND
TMS EVIDENCE FOR DISSOCIABLE SUBCOMPONENTS OF THEORY OF MIND J.A. Pineda, UCSD; E.
Hecht, Emory University; D. Brang, UCSD; E. Agmon, UCSD;
H.A. Elfenbein, UCSD; J.B. Davis, UCSD – A distinction is
made between social-perceptive components of theory of
mind (ToM), involving judgments of mental state based
on facial and bodily expressions, and social-cognitive
components, which are more representation-based and
linked to language. This is similar to the distinction
between representing the mental state of another as if it
were one's own (simulation theory), requiring
involvement of the mirror neuron system (MNS), and
explicit reasoning about mental states (theory theory),
which does not. The MNS, located in part in the pars
opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), is thought to
be involved in producing shared neural representations
about the self and others, including ToM. Furthermore,

43

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

evidence that mu rhythms over sensorimotor cortex are
suppressed during MNS function allowed testing of this
componential view of ToM. In Study 1, participants
performed an emotion recognition task, assumed to
engage the social-perceptual component, while a cartoons
task was assumed to engage the social-cognitive
component. In Study 2, a 1 Hz repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation (rTMS) pulse was applied to the left
IFG for 5 minutes prior to task performance. In Study 1,
mu suppression was positively correlated with accuracy
on the social-perceptual but not the social-cognitive task.
In Study 2, rTMS inhibited mu suppression. Furthermore,
it had little effect on performance on the social-cognitive
task, while significantly decreasing accuracy and
increasing response latency on the social-perceptual task.
These results are consistent with a componential view of
ToM and suggest that other mechanisms are necessary for
mental attributions of beliefs and intentions.

R. Johnsen, Ohio State University Kenneth G. DeMarree, Ohio
State University William A. Cunningham, Ohio State
University – Previous research on the social neuroscience
of evaluation has shown that different regions of the brain
are involved in the evaluation of positive versus negative
stimuli. Many of these studies were conducted by
observing participants' reactions to presented stimuli,
such as faces or emotionally evocative images. However, it
is somewhat unclear whether these same regions would
be involved in the evaluation of self-generated attitude
objects. During functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), participants were asked to imagine objects that
they either liked or disliked. Results showed that areas of
medial OFC and nucleus accumbens were correlated with
the imagination of liked objects (relative to disliked), while
an area of lateral OFC was correlated with the imagination
of disliked objects (relative to liked). Additional analyses
suggested that activation in these regions may vary as a
function of individual differences. These results build on
prior findings showing that many of the same regions of
the brain involved in the evaluation of positive and
negative information are also implicated in the evaluation
of internally-generated liked and disliked objects. That is,
some of the same evaluative circuits utilized in stimulus
driven evaluation are also utilized during top-down
generation of evaluatively-laden information.

H45
TAKING ANOTHER'S PERSPECTIVE INCREASES
SELF-REFERENTIAL NEURAL PROCESSING Daniel L.
Ames, Harvard University; Adrianna C. Jenkins, Harvard
University; Mahzarin R. Banaji, Harvard University; Jason P.
Mitchell, Harvard University – Perspective-taking has been
linked to many prosocial effects, such as increased
empathy, increased altruism, and decreased stereotyping.
One explanation for these effects holds that, in taking
another's perspective, one comes to view the target in a
more "self-like" way. Recent neuroimaging findings have
demonstrated that a region of ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vMPFC) is preferentially engaged by selfreferential thought. Thus, to the extent that perspectivetaking leads to greater overlap in the cognitive processes
engaged by the consideration of self and other, vMPFC
activity should differentiate less between self and a person
whose perspective has recently been adopted than one
encountered from a more distal vantage. To test this
hypothesis, participants were scanned while judging both
their own preferences and the preferences of two
individuals who differed in whether participants had
earlier taken their perspective or described them in a
closely-matched control task. Consistent with predictions,
vMPFC activity was found to be greater (more similar to
self) for perspective-taking targets than for nonperspective-taking targets. This dissociation was
replicated in an alternative vMPFC region of interest
defined by an independent self-reference task. These
results suggest that conscious attempts to adopt another's
perspective may prompt perceivers to consider other
people via cognitive processes typically reserved for
introspection about the self-supporting the proposition
that the prosocial effects of perspective taking may arise
through a blurring of the cognitive distinction between
self and other.

H47
A DISTANCE PRINCIPLE OF ORGANIZATION OF
THE VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM Elinor Amit, New York
University; Yaacov Trope, New York University; Galit Yovel,
Tel Aviv University – Perceiving the distance of an object
from the self is a fundamental feature of the visual system.
Here we used fMRI to test the hypothesis that the ventral
visual stream represents distance-related information in
discrete cortical regions. In particular, object-related
regions (Lateral Occipital Complex - LOC) are biased
towards proximal stimuli, whereas scene-related regions
(Parahipocampal Place Area - PPA) are biased towards
distant stimuli. Participants were presented with Ponzo
lines, which create an illusion of depth. In one condition,
the stimuli (pictures of objects or houses) appeared in the
perceived proximal position. In the second condition, the
stimuli appeared in the perceived distal position. In
addition, we ran a localizer, which included scenes,
objects and scrambled images of objects. We defined for
each subject the PPA (Scenes > Objects, p < 10-4,
uncorrected) and the LOC (Objects > Scrambled Objects, p
< 10-4, uncorrected). Consistent with our hypothesis, we
found a double dissociation such that object areas showed
a higher response to perceived proximal stimuli than
perceived distal stimuli, whereas scene-related regions
showed a higher response to perceived distal objects than
perceived proximal objects. Importantly, this effect was
found for both objects and houses. This outcome suggests
the plausibility of a distance principle of organization of
the ventral visual stream.

H46
THE
NEURAL
SUBSTRATES
INVOLVED
IN
EVALUATION OF SELF-GENERATED STIMULI Ingrid

44

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

H48
DEFICITS
AND
ASSETS
ACROSS
NEUROCOGNITIVE DOMAINS IN ANOREXIA NERVOSA
AND AUTISM: DEFINING A TRANSDIAGNOSTIC
FRAMEWORK Nancy Zucker, DUMC; Rhonda Merwin,
DUMC; Ashley Moskovich, DUMC; Molly Losh, UNC-CH;
Cynthia Bulik, UNC-CH; Steven Green, Duke University;
Joseph Piven, UNC-CH; Kevin LaBar, Duke University –
Characterizing social cognitive deficits and assets across
psychiatric conditions can help define relevant symptom
dimensions that cross arbitrary diagnostic boundaries.
Individuals with anorexia nervosa (AN) who exhibit a
chronic illness course exhibit elevated features of autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) and have first degree relatives
with elevated rates of ASD, disorders notable for
profound impairment in reciprocal social interaction. We
compare neurocognitive deficits and assets in 22 adult,
weight-restored females with AN relative to an age and
sex-matched sample with ASD using a battery that
assesses competencies at multiple levels of analysis: 1)
neuropsychological functioning (verbal/performance
ratio; set-shifting; visual organization; visual memory); 2)
social perception (emotion and body language
identification; integration of context into interpretation of
emotional state); 3) perceptual processes (visual scan
paths; central coherence); and 4) interpersonal competence
(parent and participant reports). We hypothesized that
while both groups exhibit similar behavioral deficits in
social reciprocity and overlap in information processing
styles, there would be differences in the motivational
salience of visual inputs. Preliminary results support this
hypothesis and indicate that whereas individuals with
ASD tend to avoid salient features of the face, individuals
with AN exhibit a pattern of hyperscanning; scanning and
subsequently avoiding the eye-region but with fixation on
body language as a compensatory strategy for deciphering
affect. These perceptual processing styles combined with
deficits in the ability to integrate complex social affective
information result in similar deficits but with different
mechanisms. A model will be presented to explain
divergence in developmental trajectories of social
perception.

criteria for bipolar disorder. CON subjects had no
psychiatric history. Subjects completed the affective
Posner task, a modified version of the standard Posner
attention paradigm that includes rigged negative feedback
to induce frustration and irritability. Neuromagnetic data
were collected using a whole-head 275-channel MEG
system. We compared neural activation in the BD vs. CON
subjects following rigged feedback. Analyses were across
the whole-brain with significance set at p < .01. Results:
During the frustrating task, pediatric BD subjects,
compared to CON subjects, had significantly greater
activation of the amygdala, inferior parietal lobule,
putamen, and insula (all beta band desynchronization),
and inferior and superior frontal gyri (alpha
desynchronization). BD subjects also had significantly
lower activation of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
and middle frontal gyrus (alpha desynchronization),
precuneus (bets desynchronization), and superior
temporal gyrus (gamma synchronization). Conclusions:
When frustrated, BD youths displayed aberrant activation
of key neural regions responsible for affective and
behavioral regulation and attention modulation. In
particular, frustration in bipolar youths may be associated
with increased amygdala activity and decreased ACC
activity.
H50
CONFLICT DETECTION DURING ATTENUATION
OF RACIAL BIAS Jennifer Kubota, University of Colorado
Boulder; Jordan Wood, University of Colorado Boulder; Tiffany
A. Ito, University of Colorado Boulder – Past research
demonstrates that there is greater recruitment of conflict
detection for errors indicative of racial bias. Using a
sequential priming task, these previous studies find larger
ERNs (error-related negativity) when people erroneously
respond gun instead of tool following a Black compared
with a White neutral prime. Because of the stereotypic link
between African Americans and violence, it is thought
that participants must recruit conflict detection processes
on Black-tool trials to avoid racially biased errors (i.e.
responding gun rather than tool). Subsequent behavioral
research indicates that emotional expression can succeed
in attenuating racial bias on this same task. When primes
are angry we observe error bias, or faster and more
accurate responding to guns following Black faces than
White faces. When primes are happy this effect is
eliminated. One possible explanation for this attenuation
might be in the recruitment of cognitive control. Using the
same sequential priming task, participants viewed
pictures of Black and White faces posing angry and happy
expressions that primed guns or tools. Participants
showed race bias both in errors and ERNs to Black
compared with White faces when primes were angry, but
there was no bias in errors or ERNs when primes were
happy. Participants instead recruit these mechanisms
similarly for both Black and White targets. These results
suggest that cues integral to a target can modify the
recruitment of conflict detection and additionally

H49
THE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF IRRITABILITY IN
PEDIATRIC BIPOLAR DISORDER: A MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY (MEG) STUDY Brendan A. Rich,
NIMH; Laura Onelio, NIMH; Tom Holroyd, NIMH; Frederick
Carver, NIMH; Daniel Pine, NIMH; Richard Coppola, NIMH;
Ellen Leibenluft, NIMH – Goals: Pediatric bipolar disorder
(BD) is one of the most debilitating childhood
psychopathologies. Of its many impairing symptoms,
irritability is thought to be both highly prevalent and
incapacitating. We used magnetoencephalography (MEG)
to examine the neural mechanisms of irritability in
pediatric BD and begin to elucidate the pathophysiology
of the disorder. Methods: We compared 20 BD (14.92+2.03
years; 45% male) and 20 healthy control (CON) (14.72+1.69
years; 45% male) subjects. BD subjects met strict DSM-IV

45

Sunday, June 8, 10:45 AM – 12:00 PM

Poster Session H

demonstrate that a feature present in many everyday
encounters (a smile) can succeed in attenuating racial bias.

show decreased ratings of permissibility for accidental
harm. We used a 2 (outcome: neutral/negative) X 2 (belief:
neutral/negative) design to investigate moral reasoning in
ASD and control subjects. Results revealed a three-way
interaction, such that ASD participants rated accidental
harm as less morally permissible than did controls, while
ratings of actions in the other three conditions did not
differentiate groups. Thus, ASD subjects do not seem as
sensitive to differences between accidental and attempted
harm. Reasons for this disparity will be discussed.

H51
TRUE OR FALSE: THE RTPJ RESPONDS TO TASKRELEVANT BELIEFS. Jonathan Scholz, MIT; Hyowon
Gweon, MIT; Steven R Green, Duke University; Kevin
Pelphrey, CMU; Rebecca Saxe, MIT – Reasoning about other
people's minds recruits distinct brain regions, including
predominantly right temporal-parietal junction (rTPJ).
Most neuroimaging experiments have identified these
regions using false belief tasks, leading to disagreement
over whether activation in these brain areas reflect belief
reasoning generally, or some process specific to false
beliefs. In particular, Sommer et al. (2007) have argued
that rTPJ is involved only in reasoning about false beliefs.
In a standard false belief task, however, false belief trials
have multiple confounded properties: falseness per se,
subjects' need to inhibit their own true knowledge, and the
relevance of the belief information for successful task
performance. In this fMRI study, we used a novel, nonverbal task that required subjects to use the belief of an
agent, presented as a thought-bubble, to answer a
question about reality. On False-Belief trials, the subjects
knew the reality, and the false belief content was
potentially detrimental to task performance. On BeliefOnly trials, the subjects did not themselves know the
reality, and thus had to rely on the agent's true belief to
answer the question. We found a selective response in the
rTPJ at the time the thought-bubble appeared, only on
Belief-Only trials. These results provide evidence that rTPJ
is reliably recruited by a nonverbal belief-attribution task,
and more importantly, that activation in the rTPJ is not
specifically related to false beliefs; it is observed whenever
representing beliefs of others is task-relevant, independent
of the veracity of their contents.
H52
MORAL REASONING IN HIGH-FUNCTIONING
AUTISM Joe M. Moran, MIT; Liane Young, MIT; Su Mei Lee,
MIT; John D.E. Gabrieli, MIT; Rebecca Saxe, MIT – In the
legal system, crimes in which harm is intended (either
actual or attempted murder) are punished most severely.
Conversely, crimes of accidental harm (manslaughter)
incur lesser punishment. Investigations of moral reasoning
suggest that typically developed individuals judge
attempted harm much more severely than accidental
harm. Indeed, developmental evidence suggests that
mature moral judgments depend on the processes
responsible for representing and integrating information
about beliefs and outcomes; Accordingly, brain regions
associated with mentalising are activated during moral
reasoning. Specifically, greater engagement of the right
temporoparietal junction during reasoning about
accidental harm is linearly associated with increased
ratings of moral permissibility. Since subjects with autism
(ASD) are known to be impaired at belief/desire
reasoning and show decreased rTPJ activity during theory
of mind paradigms, we hypothesized that they would

46

